# GR-137255

**PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, vs. NOEL MAMALAYAN, ET AL.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, vs. NOEL MAMALAYAN, ET AL.
- **Ponente**: Pardo, J.
- **Division**: FIRST DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2001/nov2001/gr_137255_2001.html)

---

> FIRST DIVISION
>
> **G.R. No. 137255      November 15, 2001**
>
> PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, plaintiff-appellee,
>
> vs.
> **NOEL MAMALAYAN and REYNALDO GARCIA,** accused-appellants.
>
> **PARDO, *J.:***
>
> The case is an appeal from the decision1 of the Regional Trial Court, Laguna, at Calamba, Branch 34, convicting Noel Mamalayan and Reynaldo Garcia of robbery with rape, and sentencing each of them to *reclusion perpetua* and to indemnify Bonifacio Legaspi in the sum of Thirty Five Thousand Six Hundred Eighty Pesos (P35,680.00) as actual damages and to pay Marina Legaspi the sum of One Hundred Thousand Pesos (P100,000.00) as moral damages.
>
> On October 2, 1992, Assistant Provincial Prosecutor of Laguna Loreto M. Masa filed with the Regional Trial Court, Laguna, at Calamba an information charging Medel Mamalayan, Noel Mamalayan alias "Bong" and Reynaldo Garcia with robbery with rape, committed as follows:
>
> "That on or about May 31, 1988, at Barangay Lawa, Municipality of Calamba, Province of Laguna and within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the accused above- named with intent of gain and with the use of force upon things, conspiring, confederating and mutually helping one another, did then and there willfully, unlawfully and feloniously enter the house of BONIFACIO LEGASPI by then and there detaching the glass window where they gain entrance, and once inside, take, steal and carry away with them the following items, to wit:
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | "1. | One Armalite M 16 Rifle with SN RP 005417 | P8,000.00; |
> | "2. | Seven (7) banana type magazines of armalite M16 and 210 live ammos of the same caliber | 3,780.00 |
> | 3. | One (1) Wall Clock (Seiko) | 300.00 |
> | 4. | One (1) Colored TV set 14" (Sony) | 12,000.00 |
> | 5. | One (1) Seiko Wrist Watch | 600.00 |
> | 6. | One (1) Gold ring | 2,000.00 |
> | 7. | One (1) pair of earring | 3,000.00 |
> | 8. | One (1) Stereo Cassette | 1,000.00 |
> | 9. | Cash Money | 5.000.00 |
> |  | having a total value of | P35,680.00 |
