# GR-140365

**CESAR P. UY, ET AL., vs. HON. VICTORINO P. EVANGELISTA, ET AL.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: CESAR P. UY, ET AL., vs. HON. VICTORINO P. EVANGELISTA, ET AL.
- **Ponente**: Vitug, J.
- **Division**: THIRD DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2001/jul2001/gr_140365_2001.html)

---

> THIRD DIVISION
>
> **G.R. No. 140365      July 11, 2001**
>
> CESAR P. UY, BEATRIZ F. UY and ANITA PAPA, petitioners,
>
> vs.
> **HON. VICTORINO P. EVANGELISTA, Presiding Judge, Regional Trial Court, Quezon City, Branch 223, SAN ROQUE PUROK ONSE NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION, INC., BELEN DUAN, JINKY A. SAN LORENZO, ORLANDO DONAIRE, ODELON ALLAMORIN, JERSON TABON, ESTHER MAHIPOS, JULIE D. GASPAR, CECELIA LEGARA, CONRADO TORIO, CHARLIE VERANO, FREDDIE DEBIAS, VICENTE D. CALIPAY, LEONILO POLAR, ROQUE AMANO, RICARDO ALLAMORIN, CARMELO DIALOGO, ROY CATAMPONGAN, PATERNO DELA CERNA, ROLANDO SASPA, WARLITO ELIMANGCO, EDNA VILLAMOR, JOSEPHINE MERIN, MARCIANO JOP, JR.** respondents.
>
> **VITUG, *J.:***
>
> On 01 September 1997, herein respondents San Roque Purok Onse Neighborhood Association, Inc., Belen Duan, et al., filed a complaint for specific performance, reformation and declaration of nullity of a deed of exchange, as well as for damages, against petitioners Cesar P. Uy, Beatriz F. Uy, NATASYA Enterprises, Inc., and Anita Papa before the Regional Trial Court, Branch 223, of Quezon City.
>
> In the complaint, private respondents (then plaintiffs) alleged four causes of action; to wit:
>
> "AS FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION
>
> "3. Defendants spouses Uy are (were) the registered owners of a parcel of land containing an area of 5,000 square meters described and embraced under TCT No. RT-5390 (357373) in which all plaintiffs herein possess and reside even up to the present, a copy of the aforesaid title is hereto attached as ANNEX `A’ is made an integral part of this complaint;
>
> "4. Fearful of possible malicious use by unscrupulous landowners of criminal prosecution under P.D. 772 and mindful of the government’s Community Mortgage Program (CMP) as the best option for them as poor and landless citizens to legally acquire, at the same time, wary of some nefarious individuals or groups who continue to dupe and victimize hapless but legitimate buyers like them, plaintiffs went into extensive search and research until ultimately they were led last year by Mr. Boy Javellonar to defendants spouses Uy, who were reportedly either citizens of or permanent/temporary residents of Australia;
>
> "5. Immediately thereafter, negotiations for the plaintiff’s acquisition of defendants spouses Uy’s property began between the latter and plaintiffs through Ms. Arcelita Gebone, who was and is still the President of `Samahang Sariling Sikap Ng Holy Spirit, Quezon City, Inc.’ likewise a neighborhood association incorporated way back in 1988 and is composed of members occupying a bigger track of land with an area of about 2 hectares supposedly owned by one Gervacio Luis Que, from where defendants spouses Uy’s property was reportedly derived from as a portion thereof. In the meantime, to legalize their continued stay in the premises, said Ms. Gebone, authorized plaintiffs to remain in the premises, by virtue of her formal appointment as caretaker of the property in question, embodied in a Certification dated September 20, 1996, a copy of which is hereto attached as Annex `B’ and is made an integral part hereof;
>
> "6. Under date of December 10, 1996 and only after months of previous intense negotiations, herein defendant Cesar Uy authorized Ms. Arcelita Gebone to have the property surveyed, which in turn, was given clearance by the Barangay Holy Spirit officials on December 12, 1996, in preparation for the plaintiff’s acquisition of said property in accordance with and by virtue of the CMP program, copies of the aforesaid Authorization and Clearance are hereto attached as Annexes `C’ and `D’ respectively and are made integral parts hereof;
>
> "7. Pursuant to the aforementioned negotiations and in compliance with one of the requirements under the CMP, plaintiffs caused for the survey and subdivision of the property of defendants spouses Uy, which was completed and finalized in a Plan prepared by Geodetic Engineer, Job B. Bragois on December 20, 1996, a copy of said plan (reduced from its original measurements to bond size), is hereto attached as Annex `E’ and is made an integral part hereof;
>
> "8. However, after a few months and for no apparent reason, defendants spouses Uy balked and reneged from their original commitment for plaintiffs to acquire their property at the priced fixed by and in accordance with CMP rules and guidelines. Instead, said defendants countered to sell the same directly to plaintiffs at the price of Two Thousand Five Hundred (2,500.00) Pesos or for an aggregate of P12,500,000.00 for the entire 5,000 sq. m. lot, payable with a down payment of P1,800,000.00 and the remaining balance of P10,700,000.00 to be paid by or through a mortgage constituted over the same property to and in favor of defendant Anita Papa, payable 25 years at 300 equal monthly installments of P162,365.00, commencing August 15, 1997, a copy of the real estate mortgage in 11 pages, dated July 1997, is hereto attached as Annex `F’ and is made an integral part hereof;
>
> "9. When the other members of the Samahang Sariling Sikap Ng Holy Spirit, Quezon City, Inc. (especially those who were/are not actual occupants of the premises owned by defendants spouses Uy), came to know of the foregoing change in heart by the latter, they expressed lack of interest in pursuing the stalled negotiations with said defendants spouses Uy. Herein plaintiffs, however, went on to pursue even with the above modification, this time only in respect to the actual portion they were occupying, having extensively invested a lot of money and having improved such premises over the past year(s). In the process, they were able to raise about P1,200,000.00. Thus, and constituting as their,
>
> "III
>
> "SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION
>
> "10. Plaintiffs sought defendant Cesar Uy to allow them to purchase the property even under their counter proposal provided only that (a) such sale be done individually in accordance with their actual holdings or possession and (b) that the failure of one or others to pay their parri-passu share in the mortgage obligation shall not affect those who are or shall be religiously paying. For this purpose, plaintiff submitted on August 7, 1997 the Articles of Incorporation of SARPONAI limiting membership thereto only to the actual occupants of the property in question in accordance with the revised plan re-surveyed last April 5, 1997 completed only of late, a copy of which, likewise reduced to bond size is hereto attached as Annex `G’ and is made an integral part hereof;
>
> "11. Plaintiffs subsequently submitted to defendants spouses Uy, to enable the latter to draw the pertinent documents in accordance therewith and based upon the following individual acquisitions, to wit:
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | Name | Block/Lot No. | Area (in sq. m.) |
> | 1. Belen A. Duan | 1/2 | 150.00 |
> | 2. Jinky San Lorenzo | 1/3 | 50.00 |
> | 3. Orlando Donaire | 1/4 | 67.00 |
> | 4. Odelon Allamorin | 1/7 | 55.00 |
> | 5. Jerson Tabon | 1/8 | 30.00 |
> | 6. Esther Mahipos | 1/9 | 30.00 |
> | 7. Julie D. Gaspar | I/11 | 40.00 |
> | 8. Cecelia Legara | I/13 | 65.00 |
> | 9. Conrado Torio | I/15 | 50.00 |
> | 10. Charlie Verano | I/16 | 32.00 |
> | 11. Freddie Debias | I/17 | 32.00 |
> | 12. Vicente Calipay | II/1 | 82.50 |
> | 13. Leonilo Polar | II/2 | 74.50 |
> | 14. Roque Amano | II/3 | 90.50 |
> | 15. Ricardo Allamorin | II/4 | 89.00 |
> | 16. Carmelo Dialogo | II/5 | 98.00 |
> | 17. Roy Catampongan | II/6 | 95.50 |
> | 18. Paterno dela Cerna | II/7 | 36.00 |
> | 19. Rolano Saspa | II/12 | 68.00 |
> | 20. Warlito Elimangco | III/5 | 30.50 |
> | 21. Edna Villamor | IV/1 | 154.00 |
> | 22. Josephine Merin | IV/4 | 93.00 |
> | 23. Marciano Gop, Jr. | IV/5 | 74.00 |
> | Total | 1,586.00 | |
