# Executive Order No. 131

**REORGANIZING THE MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND RENAMING IT AS THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES ABOLISHING THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY INTEGRATING ALL OFFICES AND AGENCIES WHOSE FUNCTIONS RELATE TO ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES INTO THE MINISTRY DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 131
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1987/eo_131_1987.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 131 January 30, 1987**
>
> REORGANIZING THE MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND RENAMING IT AS THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES ABOLISHING THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY INTEGRATING ALL OFFICES AND AGENCIES WHOSE FUNCTIONS RELATE TO ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES INTO THE MINISTRY DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
>
> RECALLING that the reorganization of the government is mandated expressly in Article II, Section 1 (a), and Article III of the Freedom Constitution;
>
> HAVING IN MIND that, pursuant to Executive Order No. 5 (1986), it is directed that necessary and proper changes in the organizational and functional structures of the government, its agencies and its instrumentalities, be effected in order to promote efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of public services;
>
> REALIZING that the Ministry of Natural Resources must be reorganized and strengthened in order to increase its capacity to carry out powers and functions related to the demands of economic recovery, particularly the administration management, development, conservation, regulation and proper use of the country's natural resources, for the benefit of all Filipinos;
>
> AFFIRMING that the government needs at line agency for the formulation and supervision of its energy resource development program on a unified and coordinated manner;
>
> COGNIZANT of the important influence of the energy sector in the social and economic life of the country;
>
> TAKING NOTE that the magnitude, complexity and strategic importance of the country's energy requirements, demand an integrated planning and supervision of the country's comprehensive energy program geared toward achieving energy self-reliance and the judicious conservation and efficient utilization of the country's resources;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the sovereign will of the Filipino People and the Freedom Constitution, do hereby order:
>
> SECTION 1 to Sec. 33
>
> Sec. 34. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon its approval.
>
> APPROVED in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 30th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.
>
>
>
