# Executive Order No. 139

**MODIFYING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CERTAIN IMPORTED ARTICLES AS PROVIDED FOR IN THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978, AS AMENDED, IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THE MARGINS OF PREFERENCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE DECISIONS OF THE SEVENTEENTH ASEAN ECONOMIC MINISTERS (AEM) MEETING AND THE EIGHTEENTH MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND TOURISM (COTT).**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 139
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1987/eo_139_1987.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 139 February 27, 1987**
>
> MODIFYING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CERTAIN IMPORTED ARTICLES AS PROVIDED FOR IN THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978, AS AMENDED, IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THE MARGINS OF PREFERENCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE DECISIONS OF THE SEVENTEENTH ASEAN ECONOMIC MINISTERS (AEM) MEETING AND THE EIGHTEENTH MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND TOURISM (COTT).
>
> Pursuant to the powers vested in me under Section 402 of the Tariff of Customs Code of 1978, as amended, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. The articles specifically listed in Annex "'A" hereof as classified under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, shall be accorded the margins of preference as specified in Column 4 of the said "Annex "A". In effect, such articles shall be subject to the Preferential Tariff for ASEAN in accordance with the schedule indicated opposite each article as specified in Column 5 of the said Annex "A".
>
> Sec. 2. In the event that subsequent changes are made in the basic Philippine rate of duty on any of the above-mentioned articles, such articles shall automatically be accorded the corresponding margins of preference specified in Column 4 of the said Annex "A".
>
> Sec. 3. After the date of effectivity of this Executive Order, all the above described articles entered or withdrawn from warehouses in the Philippines for consumption shall be subject to the rate of import duty herein prescribed subject to qualification under the Rules of Origin as specified in the Agreement on ASEAN Preferential Trading Arrangements ratified on August 1, 1977.
>
> Sec. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | ANNEX "A" | | | | |
> | ARTICLES GRANTED MARGINS OF PREFERENCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE DECISION OF THE 17th ASEAN ECONOMIC MINISTERS AND THE 18th COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND TOURISM MEETINGS | | | | |
> | CCC No. | Description of Product | Existing Rate of Duty | Margin of Preference | ASEAN Preferential Tariff |
> | (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) |
> | A. Articles Negotiated During the 18th COTT Meeting | | | | |
> | ex. 25.31 | 900 Feldspar | 20% | Additional 10% | 13% |
> | ex. 29.16 | 000 Citric acid | 10% | Additional 10% | 6.5% |
> | ex. 35.05 | 000 Dental Alloy | 10% | Additional 10% | 6.5% |
> | ex. 83.01 | 000 Padlocks | 30% | Additional 10% | 21% |
> | ex. 85.25 | 200 Insulators of porcelain | 30% | Additional 10% | 21% |
> | B. Articles With Import Value of Over $10 Million (CIF)  In 1978 Accorded 25% Margin of Tariff Preference | | | | |
> | 10.01 | 900 Other wheat (including spelt) and meslin, unmilled | 10% | 25% | 7.5% |
> | ex. 26.01 | 200 Iron ores, non-agglomerated | 10% | 25% | 7.5% |
> | ex. 27.04 | 100 Coke and semi-coke (including char) of coal, whether or not agglomerated | 10% | Additional 5% | 7.5% |
> | ex. 28.16 | 000 Ammonia in aqueous (aqual-ammonia) | 10% | 25% | 7.5% |
> | 31.02 | 700 Urea, whether or not pure | 20% | 25% | 15% |
> | ex. 32.05 | 100 Other synthetic organic dye-stuffs (including pigment dyestuff) | 10% | Additional 5% | 7.5% |
> | ex. 38.14 | 000 Gum inhibitors and similar prepared additives for mineral oils | 20% | 25% | 15% |
> | ex. 76.01 | 200 Ingots and pigs of aluminum | 10% | Additional 25% | 7.5% |
> | ex. 76.01 | 200 Aluminum and aluminum alloys, unwrought |  |  |  |
> | ex. 79.01 | 200 Ingots, slabs, and pigs, of zinc (including zinc spelter) | 10% | Additional 5% | 7.5% |
> | ex. 84.22 | 600 Loading machines other than yarders (e.g., pay loaders, wheel loaders) | 20% | 25% | 15% |
> | ex. 82.62 | 000 Ball bearings | 10% | Additional 5% | 7.5% |
>
>
>
