# Executive Order No. 143

**MODIFYING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CERTAIN IMPORTED ARTICLES AS PROVIDED UNDER THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978, AS AMENDED, IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THE DECISIONS OF THE EIGHTEENTH ASEAN ECONOMIC MINISTERS (AEM) AND TWENTY-FIRST COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND TOURISM (COTT) MEETINGS TO PROVIDE A MINIMUM LEVEL OF 25% MARGIN OF PREFERENCE IN RESPECT TO ITEMS WHICH ARE UNDER THE ASEAN PREFERENTIAL TRADING ARRANGEMENTS (PTA)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 143
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1987/eo_143_1987.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 143 February 27, 1987**
>
> MODIFYING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CERTAIN IMPORTED ARTICLES AS PROVIDED UNDER THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978, AS AMENDED, IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THE DECISIONS OF THE EIGHTEENTH ASEAN ECONOMIC MINISTERS (AEM) AND TWENTY-FIRST COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND TOURISM (COTT) MEETINGS TO PROVIDE A MINIMUM LEVEL OF 25% MARGIN OF PREFERENCE IN RESPECT TO ITEMS WHICH ARE UNDER THE ASEAN PREFERENTIAL TRADING ARRANGEMENTS (PTA)
>
> Pursuant to the powers vested in me under the Section 402 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. The article specifically listed in Annex "A" hereof as classified under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, presently enjoying 20% margin of preference (MOP) shall be accorded additional 15% MOP as agreed upon during the Twenty-First Meeting of the Committee on Trade and Tourism and the Eighteenth ASEAN Economic Ministers (AEM) Meeting. In effect, such articles shall be subject to the Preferential Tariff for ASEAN in accordance with the schedule indicated opposite each article as specified in Column 4 of said Annex "A".
>
> Sec. 2. In the event that any subsequent changes are made in the basic Philippines rate of duty on any of the above-mentioned article, such articles shall automatically be accorded the corresponding margin of preference.
>
> Sec. 3. After the date of effectivity of this Executive Order, all the above-described articles entered or withdrawn from warehouses from in the Philippines for consumption shall be subject to the rate of import duty herein prescribed subject to qualification under the Rules of Origin as specified in the Agreement on ASEAN Preferential Trading Arrangements ratified on August 1, 1977.
>
> Sec. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.
>
>
>
