# Executive Order No. 258

**GRANTING GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS AND THE BUREAU OF FOOD AND DRUGS AUTONOMY IN THE USE OF THEIR INCOME**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 258
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1987/eo_258_1987.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 258 July 25, 1987**
>
> GRANTING GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS AND THE BUREAU OF FOOD AND DRUGS AUTONOMY IN THE USE OF THEIR INCOME
>
> WHEREAS, the current pattern of social and economic development considers the health sector a high priority requiring adequate government support;
>
> WHEREAS, government hospitals and the Bureau of Food and Drugs of the Department of Health are in the forefront in the government's effort to provide effective and efficient medical and health services; and
>
> WHEREAS, the services of government hospitals and the Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFD) can be facilitated if their income receipts are immediately made available to meet their immediate needs;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. Any income earned by any government hospital and by the BFD shall be deemed to have been released from appropriations authorized for such hospital or the BFD, as the case may be, and shall be immediately available for expenditures.
>
> Sec. 2. Fund releases from the Department of Budget and Management shall be reduced by the amount of income earned by the hospitals and the BFD. For this purposes, these agencies shall submit periodic reports of their income as well as reports indicating the details of expenditures thereof.
>
> Sec. 3. In the event that any of these agencies realizes income more than its authorized appropriation, such excess shall be deemed automatically appropriated and released to augment existing authorized appropriation.
>
> Sec. 4. The rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this Executive Order shall be jointly issued by the Department of Finance and the Department of Budget and Management.
>
> Sec. 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, on 25th of July, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Seven.
>
>
>
