# Executive Order No. 225

**FURTHER AMENDING SECTION 228 OF THE NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE, AS AMENDED**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 225
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1987/eo_225_1987.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 225 July 16, 1987**
>
> **FURTHER AMENDING SECTION 228 OF THE NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE, AS AMENDED**
>
> WHEREAS, the promotion and development of sports is one of the stated policies of the government;
>
> WHEREAS, professional boxing is one sport where Filipinos have shown an even chance of excelling and attaining world prominence; and
>
> WHEREAS, there is need to grant tax incentives to enhance the growth and popularity of professional boxing;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, president of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby direct and order, that:
>
> Sec. 1. Section 228, paragraph (6) of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
>
> "3. Ten per centum in the case of boxing exhibitions: Provided, however, That boxing exhibitions wherein World or Oriental Championship in any division is at stake shall be exempt from amusement tax: Provided, further, That at least one of the contenders for World or Oriental Championship is a citizen of the Philippines, and said exhibitions are promoted by a citizen/s of the Philippines or by a corporation or association at least sixty per cent of the capital of which is owned by such citizens."
>
> Sec. 2. All provisions of laws, decrees, letters of instructions, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with or contrary to this Executive Order are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly. lawphi1.net
>
> Sec. 3. This Executive Order shall take effect upon promulgation of the implementing rules and regulations by the Secretary of Finance.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.
>
>
>
