# Executive Order No. 237

**REORGANIZING THE CABINET SECRETARIAT AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 237
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1987/eo_237_1987.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 237 July 22, 1987**
>
> **REORGANIZING THE CABINET SECRETARIAT AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**
>
> WHEREAS, the Cabinet is the primary advisory body of the President;
>
> WHEREAS, the Cabinet, in support of the Presidency, serves as a forum for information exchange and feedback, issue discussion and resolution, as well as a coordination integration mechanism;
>
> WHEREAS, the Cabinet Secretariat was authorized to provide the technical and administrative support to the Presidential Committee on Public Ethics and Accountability, created under Administrative Order No. 25, dated May 15, 1987;
>
> WHEREAS, the Cabinet Secretary was mandated to preside over the meetings of the Cabinet Assistance Systems, as reconstituted, under Memorandum Order No. 96, dated June 2, 1987;
>
> WHEREAS, there is a need to define the powers, functions and structure of and to provide for the reorganization of the existing Cabinet Secretariat;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the sovereign will of the Filipino people and the Constitution, do hereby order:
>
> (SECTIONS 1 to 12)
>
> Sec. 13. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon its approval.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.
>
>
>
