# Executive Order No. 314

**CREATING THE BAGONG KILUSANG KABUHAYAN AT KAUNLARAN COMMITTEE**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 314
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1987/eo_314_1987.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 314 December 17, 1987**
>
> CREATING THE BAGONG KILUSANG KABUHAYAN AT KAUNLARAN COMMITTEE
>
> WHEREAS, there is a need to formulate the basic policies of the Bagong Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran and to redirect and refocus its thrusts and objectives in line with aim of the present administration of promoting, generating and developing livelihood opportunities and productive enterprises;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. There is hereby created in the office of the President the Bagong Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (BKKK) Committee, to be composed of the following:
>
> Executive Secretary - - Chairman
>
> Undersecretary, Presidential Management Staff - Vice-Chairman
>
> Deputy Executive Secretary - Member
>
> Assistant Executive Secretary for Budget and Corporate Affairs - Member
>
> Presidential Legal Counsel - Member
>
> Sec. 2. The Bagong Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (BKKK) Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
>
> a. To advise the President on matters concerning the national livelihood program;
>
> b. To formulate basic policies, programs and guidelines for the implementation of the national livelihood program;
>
> c. To review and coordinate all activities related to the national livelihood program.
>
> all in accordance with Executive Order No. 130 (January 30, 1987) and Executive Order No. 238 (July 22, 1987).
>
> Sec. 3. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.
>
>
>
