# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 145

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 386 DATED 19 DECEMBER 1989, ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL CRIME INFORMATION SYSTEM (NCIS), PROVIDING MECHANISMS THEREFORE AND FOR OTHER SIMILAR PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 145
- **Date**: August 27, 1999
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1999/eo_145_1999.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 145, August 27, 1999 ]
>
> AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 386 DATED 19 DECEMBER 1989, ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL CRIME INFORMATION SYSTEM (NCIS), PROVIDING MECHANISMS THEREFORE AND FOR OTHER SIMILAR PURPOSES
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 386 dated 19 December 1989, has mandated the establishment of a National Crime Information System (NCIS) to help in the identification and apprehension of criminals, improve the efficiency of criminal justice agencies and ultimately help reduce crimes, through better planning and use of manpower, equipment and government resources;
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to accelerate the implementation of the National Crime Information System (NCIS) in order to build a comprehensive criminal database;
>
> **WHEREAS,** timely, accurate and complete crime information shall help our Criminal Justice System to perform their functions in law enforcement, prosecution, adjudication, correction and rehabilitation;
>
> **WHEREAS,** crime statistics which can be derived from the system can be used in the formulation of crime prevention programs, policy making and sectoral planning to address crime and lawlessness;
>
> **WHEREAS,** crime is detrimental to the economic condition of the country and criminal syndicates are getting sophisticated thus, consolidation of information resources of various criminal justice agencies is required to combat criminal syndicates;
>
> **NOW THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** The Chairman of the National Police Commission, the Director of the National Bureau of Investigation, the Chief and Director General of the Philippine National Police and the Secretary General of the National Statistical Coordination Board shall comprise the NCIS Advisory Board. The Advisory Board shall be the policy making body of the National Crime Information System (NCIS).
>
> **Section 2.** The establishment of the NCIS shall include the application development, acquisition of hardware and networking equipment, installation of telecommunication facilities, database build-up, manning and manpower training and all other necessary components. This shall be implemented in the following phases:
>
> **Phase I ,** Establishment of the NCIS at the National Capital Region and its nationwide expansion. This phase shall be completed within the next two years.
>
> The Offices that shall be primarily involved under this phase are those that operate under the four pillars of the Criminal Justice System:
>
> 1. The Law Enforcement - Philippine National Police, National Bureau of Investigation and National Police Commission.
>
> 2. The Prosecution - National Prosecution Service
>
> 3. The Courts - Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan, Regional Trial Courts, Metropolitan and Municipal Courts
>
> 4. The Corrections - Bureau of Corrections, Parole and Probation Administration, Bureau of Jail Management and Penology and the Board of Pardon and Parole
>
> **Phase II.** This phase shall include activities concerning the development of Crime Information System related to other offices not covered under Phase I. It shall include computer upgrading systems development and manpower training for technical personnel of other offices concerned as systems link-up or networking is reported to ensure an effective and efficient data communication between and among participating agencies. This phase shall be completed within the next five (5) years.
>
> **Section 3.** The National Computer Center shall be the implementing agency of the NCIS and shall be responsible for its immediate and timely completion. Accordingly, the NCC shall form a body with representation from each of the participating agencies and complemented by highly technical personnel necessary in the execution of the project.
>
> **Section 4.** All NCIS participating agencies are hereby directed to fully cooperate and coordinate with the NCC to ensure the strict and immediate implementation of the NCIS Project to guarantee its success.
>
> **Section 5.** The other agencies/departments/bureaus responsible in generating crime information in their respective areas are directed to coordinate with the National Computer Center in complying with the standardization of the criminal database. These departments and their respective bureaus/agencies/offices are indicated below:
>
> a. Department of National Defense - pertaining to violation of airport security laws and war and military laws.
>
> b. Department of Finance - pertaining to violations of customs, laws, economic crimes and violations of internal revenue laws.
>
> c. Department of Transportation and Communications - pertaining to violations of air space, Land Transportation Code, maritime laws and franchising of Domestic Water Transportation.
>
> d. Department of Interior and Local Government - pertaining to crime information on prisoners confined at the provincial jails.
>
> e. Department of Social Welfare and Development - pertaining to youthful offenders.
>
> f. Department of Health - pertaining to violations of food and drug laws and regulations.
>
> g. Department of Trade and Industry - pertaining to crime information on consumer protection and domestic trade laws and regulations.
>
> h. Department of Foreign Affairs - pertaining to crime information on Philippine foreign policies, illegal processing and issuance of passports, visas and travel documents.
>
> i. Dangerous Drugs Board - pertaining to violations of RA 6125 (Dangerous Drugs Law), as amended.
>
> j. Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas - pertaining to violation of banking laws.
>
> k. Department of Justice - pertaining to all criminal investigations
>
> l. Such other agencies as may be mandated by law to implement special laws.
>
> **Section 6.** The Department of Budget and Management shall transfer all funds related to the NCIS Project from the different participating agencies to the NCC. The NCC shall have control and supervision over the disbursement of NCIS funds, including all future appropriations for the NCIS Project.
>
> The agencies involved in the completion of Phase I of the NCIS Project, as defined in Section 2 above, shall be the following:
>
> 1. The Law Enforcement - Philippine National Police, National Bureau of Investigation and National Police Commission.
>
> 2. The Prosecution - National Prosecution Service
>
> 3. The Courts - Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan, Regional Trial Courts, Metropolitan and Municipal Courts
>
> 4. The Corrections - Bureau of Corrections, Parole and Probation, Administration, Bureau of Jail Management and Penology and the Board of Pardon and Parole.
>
> **Section 7.** The amount of Twenty Million Pesos (P20,000,000.00) from the contingency funds of the Office of the President is hereby allocated as initial operating funds for the NCC to implement the NCIS Project.
>
> **Section 8.** All decrees, orders, memoranda, inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 9.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. The National Computer Center shall promulgate the implementing rules and regulations to carry out and accomplish the objectives of this Executive Order.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-nine.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> (SGD.) **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **RONALDO B. ZAMORA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
