# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 166

**FURTHER EXPANDING THE DELINEATED LEGAZPI PORT ZONE AS PROVIDED FOR UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 347, DATED JUNE 18, 1996**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 166
- **Date**: October 19, 1999
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1999/eo_166_1999.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 166, October 19, 1999 ]
>
> FURTHER EXPANDING THE DELINEATED LEGAZPI PORT ZONE AS PROVIDED FOR UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 347, DATED JUNE 18, 1996
>
> I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Legazpi is hereby further expanded and delineated as follows:
>
> > “Beginning at a point marked 1 on the plan at a distance of 398.46m with bearing S 44°56’ E from BLLM No. 1, CAD 47, Albay Cadastre, thence to point 2 at a distance of 179.68m with bearing N 82°12’ E, thence to point 3 at a distance of 372.05m with bearing N 22°23’ W, thence to point 4 at a distance of 425.04m with bearing N 10°51’ W, thence to point 5 at a distance of 299.60m with bearing N 02°17’ E, thence to point 6 at a distance of 332.50m with bearing N 17°36’ E, thence to point 7 at a distance of 950.00m with bearing DUE EAST, thence to point 8 at a distance of 1,600.40m with bearing DUE SOUTH, thence to point 9 at a distance of 452.96m bearing with DUE WEST, thence to point 10 at a distance of 343.99m with bearing S 62°34’ W, thence to point 11 at a distance of 177.50m with bearing N 62°42’ E, thence to point 12 at a distance of 165.88m with bearing N 35°42’ W, thence to point 13 at a distance of 134.72m with bearing N 06°57’ W, thence to point 1, the point of beginning at a distance of 12.45m with bearing N 56°14 E, all in all comprising a total area of 1,642,062.00 sq. m. more or less.”
>
> **Section 2.** The Legazpi Port Zone, as expanded and delineated, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the Philippine Ports Authority, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the Government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development and utilization of the port areas in the said Port Zone.
>
> **Section 3.** Executive Order No. 347 dated June 18, 1996, and all other orders, proclamations and issuances or portions thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of October, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety nine.1awp++i1
>
> (Sgd.) **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**
>
> By the President:
>
> **RONALDO B. ZAMORA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
