# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 106

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 103 DATED MAY 25, 1999, BY TRANSFERRING THE MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE COMPETITIVENESS ENHANCEMENT FUND (ACEF) AND NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL (NNC) TO THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 106
- **Date**: May 31, 1999
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1999/eo_106_1999.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 106, May 31, 1999 ]
>
> AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 103 DATED MAY 25, 1999, BY TRANSFERRING THE MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE COMPETITIVENESS ENHANCEMENT FUND (ACEF) AND NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL (NNC) TO THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
>
> WHEREAS, the Department of Agriculture manages and oversees the volume of specific agricultural product that is allowed to be imported with lower tariff as committed by the Philippines to the World Trade Organization (WTO) under the Uruguay Round;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Department of Agriculture has properly linked up food production with nutrition; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** under Sec. 31, Title III, Book III of Administrative Code of 1987, the President has a continuing authority to reorganize his Office.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA** , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:
>
> **Section 1.** *Management of Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Fund (ACEF).* The Department of Agriculture shall manage the Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Fund in accordance with R.A. 8178.
>
> **Section 2.** *Supervision of National Nutrition Council (NCC)* The management and supervision of the National Nutrition Council shall be undertaken by the Department of Agriculture.
>
> **Section 3.** *Repealing Clause.* All executive issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any provision of this Executive Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of May in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Nine.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> (SGD.) **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **RONALDO B. ZAMORA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
