# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 185

**AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 128 DATED JULY 23, 1999 ESTABLISHING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION FOR THE NEW CENTURY AND THE MILLENNIUM AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 185
- **Date**: December 14, 1999
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1999/eo_185_1999.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 185, December 14, 1999 ]
>
> AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 128 DATED JULY 23, 1999 ESTABLISHING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION FOR THE NEW CENTURY AND THE MILLENNIUM AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
>
> WHEREAS, the enunciated policy of Executive Order No. 128 is to address the need to draft policies and programs to ensure that the fruits of science and technology shall be fully developed and applied to all priority programs of this administration;
>
> **WHEREAS,** an effective means of implementing the aforementioned policy is to effect a more active private sector representation in the commission of not only the education and business sectors but also the arts and culture as well as the non-governmental organizations, thus increasing the private sector representatives from two (2) to four (4);
>
> **WHEREAS,** equally important is for the commission to employ qualified and effective personnel who are capable of working devotedly on a full-time basis;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I,** **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Sections 1.m and 7, second paragraph, of Executive Order No. 128 dated July 23, 1999 are hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > “Sec. 1.m. Four (4) representatives from the Private sector to be designated by the President – Member
> >
> > “Sec. 7. x x x
> >
> > “The Secretariat shall have such number of personnel as may be necessary for the efficient and effective performance of its functions. All agencies of the government in the commission shall assign or detail an employee each to form the Secretariat without prejudice to hiring its own employees on a co-terminous basis with the commission, subject to the approval of the Department of Budget and Management.”
>
> **Section 3.** *Repealing Clause.* – All orders, issuances or part thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity.* – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety nine.
>
> (SGD.) **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **RONALDO B. ZAMORA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
