# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 79

**DECLARING THE PALARO NG BAYAN AS THE NATIONAL COMMUNITY SPORTS PROGRAM**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 79
- **Date**: March 05, 1999
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1999/eo_79_1999.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 79, March 05, 1999 ]
>
> DECLARING THE PALARO NG BAYAN AS THE NATIONAL COMMUNITY SPORTS PROGRAM
>
> WHEREAS, Section 13, Article II of the 1987 Constitution “recognizes the vital role of youth in nation building and shall promote and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual and social well-being“;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 19(1), Article XIV thereon provides “that the State shall promote physical education and encourage sports programs, league competitions and amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to foster self discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry.”
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Local Government Code (R.A. 7160) mandates all Local Chief Executives to “conduct an annual Palarong Barangay, Pambayan, Panlungsod, and Panlalawigan, which shall feature traditional sports and disciplines included in national and international games . . .;“
>
> **WHEREAS,** Executive Order Nos. 63 and 64, series of 1993, provide a nationwide organizational network such as the National Physical Fitness and Sports Development Council (NPFSDC) to assist the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC) in the implementation of the National Policy and Program for “Sports for All,” particularly the enhancement of community sports programs and grassroots participation; and,
>
> **WHEREAS,** community sports can serve as recruitment base to discover new talents, upgrade skills, pursue sports specialization, including the education and training of the youth for participation in higher level sports competitions.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** *Approval and Adoption of the Palaro ng Bayan as the National Community Sports Program.* The Palaro ng Bayan (hereinafter referred to as the “Program”) is hereby adopted as the National Community Sports Program aimed to enhance grassroots sports and bolster the promotion and propagation of sports nationwide. For this purpose, the third week of May of every year is hereby declared the “Palaro ng Bayan Week.”
>
> a. Stages of Competition. The Program is a community based multi-event sports meet. The stages of competition, are as follows:
>
> i. Municipal Level. All barangays will compete in a municipal level meet to determine the composition of the municipal delegation.
>
> ii. Provincial Chapter Level. All municipalities will send their respective delegations to the provincial chapter meet to determine the composition of the provincial chapter delegation.
>
> iii. National Level. All provincial chapters will send their respective contingents to the Palaro ng Bayan National Level.
>
> b. Eligibility Requirements. The following are the eligibility requirements for the participants:
>
> i. Only bona fide residents of the barangay/municipality in the last twelve (12) months as certified by the Municipal Civil Registrar are qualified to participate in the Program.
>
> ii. The program is open only to athletes from 13 to 18 years of age except those entered in the Baseball Little League competitions.
>
> iii. National athletes, members of the National Training Pool, members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and those who have competed in international meets and international age-group competitions are disqualified from the Program.
>
> **Section 2.** *Creation of a National Palaro ng Bayan Coordinating Committee.* There is hereby created a National Palaro ng Bayan Coordinating Committee (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) to closely coordinate and oversee the implementation of the program.
>
> **Section 3.** *Functions.* The Committee shall have the following functions:
>
> a. Formulate the Palaro ng Bayan Program and Implementation Plan;
>
> b. Plan, organize and implement the yearly conduct of the event beginning at the municipal/city level and graduating to the national level;
>
> c. Secure the necessary budgetary, technical and human resources support for the effective implementation of the Program;
>
> d. Identify major problem areas in the implementation of the Program and recommend necessary measures thereon;
>
> e. Prepare and implement a communication plan to generate support for the Program, particularly among the youth; and,
>
> f. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.
>
> **Section 4.** *Composition.* The Committee shall be chaired by the Chairman of the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC), Co-Chaired by the Undersecretary of DILG, with the following as members:
>
> President, League of Provinces
>
> President, League of Cities
>
> President, League of Municipalities
>
> President, Liga ng mga Barangay
>
> President, Pambansang Pederasyon ng Sangguniang Kabataan
>
> **Section 5.** *Secretariat.* Secretariat support to the Committee shall be provided jointly by PSC and DILG.
>
> **Section 6.** *Funding.* The funds necessary for the implementation of the program, including fund sources thereof, shall be determined by the Committee in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).
>
> **Section 7.** *Assistance from Other Government Agencies, Private Sector Groups and Sports Organizations.* All concerned national government agencies are hereby directed to extend full support, cooperation and active involvement in the promotion and public awareness generation for the Program.
>
> All Local Government Units (LGUs) constituting the Physical Fitness and Sports Development Councils (PFSDCs) are hereby enjoined to extend full support and active participation to the program.
>
> The Philippine Olympic Committee (POC) and National Sports Associations (NSAs) are hereby encouraged to lend their support and cooperation to the program.
>
> **Section 8.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th  day of March in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-nine.
>
> (SGD.) **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **RONALDO B. ZAMORA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
