# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 028

**Date:** 25 July 2018
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 028
**Subject:** NECROLOGICAL SERVICES FOR FORMER MINISTER OF JUSTICE RICARDO C. PUNO, SR. ON 27 JULY 2018
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2018/DC/DC028-2018JUL%20Necrological%20Services%20for%20Former%20Justice%20R%20C%20Puno%20Sr%20dtd%2025%20Jul%202018.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC028-2018JUL Necrological Services for Former Justice R C Puno Sr dtd 25 Jul 2018.pdf

---

## Subject

NECROLOGICAL SERVICES FOR FORMER MINISTER OF JUSTICE RICARDO C. PUNO, SR. ON 27 JULY 2018

## Transcription

### Page 1


DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. Va 8

TO : Undersecretaries and Assistant Secretaries
Heads of Bureaus, Commissions and Offices of the Department,
Regional/Provincial/City Prosecution Offices
Chiefs of Service

SUBJECT : NECROLOGICAL SERVICES FOR FORMER MINISTER OF
JUSTICE RICARDO C. PUNO, SR. ON 27 JULY 2018

DATE JUL 25 2018

WHEREAS, former Minister of Justice Ricardo C. Puno, Sr. served in the Ministry of
Justice, now the Department of Justice, from 23 July 1979 to 30 June 1984:

WHEREAS, on 25 July 2018, former Minister of Justice Puno joined our Creator,
which is a great loss to the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, officials and personnel of the Department and its attached and
constituent agencies, who wish to pay their last respects to the late former Minister of Justice
Puno, are invited to join the necrological services to be held on 27 July 2018 from 9:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon at the Executive Meeting Room 1, this Department, Padre Faura Street,

Ermita, Manila.
[Geter

MENARDO |. GUEVARRA

Department of Jusnce
-
Secl etary CN: 0201807324

i i
