# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 043

**Date:** 28 September 2018
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 043
**Subject:** SENATE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE HEARING ON THE PROPOSED FY 2019 BUDGET OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND ATTACHED AGENCIES
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2018/DC/DC043-2018SEP%20Senate%20Committee%20on%20Finance%20hearing%20dtd%2028%20Sep%202018.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC043-2018SEP Senate Committee on Finance hearing dtd 28 Sep 2018.pdf

---

## Subject

SENATE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE HEARING ON THE PROPOSED FY 2019 BUDGET OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND ATTACHED AGENCIES

## Transcription

### Page 1

ijj*" Ojf
SEP Z 8 2018
0" 5
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.
TO: All Undersecretaries and Assistant Secretaries
All Heads of Programs and Services, DOJ Proper
Solicitor Genera!:}0S^ C. CALIDA, OSG
Administrator D. BERMEJO, LRA
Director Genera!R QHkUy M. DELA ROSA, BUCOR
OIC-Government Corporate Counsel ^i.91010 J. VEGA, OGCC
DirectorDMHE A. GIERRAN, NBI
CommisslonerlMM^ H. MORENTE, BI
ChiefP ublic Attorney PERSlDky. RUEDA-ACOSTA, PAO
Administrator G. CO, PPA
Acting Chairman REYNOLD S. MUNSAYAC, PCGG
QIC- Executive Director BERHADETTE C. ONGOCO,O ADR
SUBJECT: SENATE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE HEARING ON THE PROPOSED
FY 2019 BUDGET OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND
ATTACHED AGENCIES
You are hereby directed to attend the scheduled hearing on 3 October 2018,
Wednesday, 1:00 P.M. at Senator Recto Room, 2"'' floor. Senate of the
Philippines, GSIS Financial Center, Pasay City.
Your personal presence and that of your Finance/Budget/Pianning Officers are
enjoined. You are further directed to immediately submit to the Office of the Secretary
the list of personnel from your office who would attend the budget hearing.
MENARDO I. GUEVARRA
Secretary Departmenl r>' lustce
C^: 0?01809288
