# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 013

**Date:** 01 August 2019
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 013
**Subject:** DELINEATION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2019/DCs/DC013-2019AUG%20Delineation%20of%20Duties%20%26%20Responsibilities%20dtd%2001%20Aug%202019.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC013-2019AUG Delineation of Duties & Responsibilities dtd 01 Aug 2019.pdf

---

## Subject

DELINEATION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

## Transcription

### Page 1

5<.NTo;
0 1 3
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.
Subject Delineation of Duties and Responsibilities
m 31
Date
Delegation of Duties and Responsibilities. In the interest of service and pursuant
to existing laws, the following areas of duties and responsibilities are hereby
delegated to the following Undersecretaries, Chief State Counsel, Prosecutor
General and Assistant Secretaries.
Undersecretaries shall have direct supervision and control over matters delegated
to the Assistant Secretaries which fall under the sub-cluster/s or special
assignments given them.
A. Law Enforcement Cluster
Undersecretary Adrian S. Sugay
Core
1. Prosecution Staff
2. National Bureau of Investigation
Speciaiized Units, Programs, and Committees
1. Justice System Infrastructure Program
2. Anti-Money Laundering Council
3. DOJ-DOE Task Force Monitoring the Implementation of the Oil
Deregulation Law
4. Dangerous Drugs Board
5. Inter-Agency Committee on Illegal Drugs (ICAD)
6. Anti-Illegal Drugs Task Force
7. GRP Monitoring Committee
8. Task Force Drug Courier
9. TWG to Draft the Unified Manual for the filing of Drug Cases
10. Task Force Balik Loob
11. Intemational Narcotics Control Board
12. National Intelligence Coordinating Agency
13. National Law Enforcement Coordinating Committee
14. Evidence Management Project
15. National Security Council- Strategic Trade Management Committee
16. Task Force on Normalization

### Page 2

17. National Security Council
18. Anti-Terrorism Council
19. Commission on Maritime and Ocean Affairs
20. National Coast Watch Council
21. National Task Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict
22. Mining Industry Coordinating Council
23. Cabinet Cluster on Security, Justice and Peace
Sub Cluster: Crisis Management, Recovery and Rehabilitation
Assistant Secretary Adonis P. Sulit
1. High-level Sub-Committee of the National Crisis Management Committee
2. Typhoon Yolanda Rehabilitation and Recovery Efforts
3. Task Force Bangon Marawi
Special Assignments/Alternate Representative:
Assistant Secretary Sergio Yap II
1. Task Force Balik Loob
2. Cabinet Cluster on Security, Justice and Peace
3. National Coast Watch Council
4. National Security Council and its Committees
5. National Security Council Strategic Trade Management Committee
6. National Task Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict
Assistant Secretary Neal M. Bainto
1. TWG to Draft the Unified Manual for the filing of Drug Cases
2. National Intelligence Coordinating Agency
3. National Law Enforcement Coordinating Committee
4. Dangerous Drugs Board
B. Legal Services and Liaison Cluster
Undersecretary Emmeline Aglipay-Villar
Core
1. Legal Staff
2. Office of the Solicitor General
3. Office of the Government Corporate Counsel
4. Presidential Commission on Good Government
5. Public Attorneys' Office
6. Land Registration Authority
7. DOJ Legislative Liaison Office

### Page 3

specialized Units, Programs and Task Forces
1. Inter-Agency Committee on Trafficking
2. Presidential Task Force Against Illegal Recruitment
3. Philippine Board on Organ Donation and Transplantation
4. Management of Rape Crisis Centers
5. Criminal Code Committee
6. Public Sector Labor Management Council
7. Privatization Council
8. National Price Coordinating Council
9. National Competitiveness Council
10. Philippine Statistics Authority
11. Philippine Development Forum
12. US-Philippines Partnership for Growth
13. Philippine Committee Against Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing
14. Inter-Agency Team for Federalism Information and Advocacy Campaign
15. DOJ Committee for Women and Children
16. PD 242 Proceedings
17. Appeals on Municipal Tax Ordinances and Revenue Measures
18. Cabinet Cluster on Economic Development
Sub Cluster: Gender and Special Protections
QIC Assistant Secretary Ma. Nerissa Motlna-Carpio
1. Juvenile Justice Welfare Council
2. Committee for the Special Protection of Children
3. Council for the Welfare of Children
4. National Child Labor Committee
5. Committee on Gender and Development
6. Inter-Agency Committee on Violence against Women and Children
7. National Coordinating and Monitoring Board for Senior Citizens
8. Governing Board of the National Council on Disability Affairs
9. Indigenous Peoples Concerns
10. Inter-Agency Committee on Children in Armed Conflict
11. Management of Rape Crisis Centers
12. DOJ Committee for Women and Children
13. Inter-Agency Council Against Child Pornography
Special Assignments/Attemate Representative:
Assistant Secretary George O. Ortha
1. Inter-Agency Council Against Trafficking
2. Inter-Agency Committee on Trafficking
3. Presidential Task Force Against Illegal Recruitment
4. Philippine Board on Organ Donation and Transplantation

### Page 4

5. Inter-Agency Team for the Federalism Information and Advocacy
Campaign
6. DOJ Focal Person for the Selection Process of the New Major Player for
the Telecommunication Industry
Assistant Secretary Margaret C. Padilla
1. Philippine Committee Against Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing
2. Privatization Council
3. Public Sector Labor-Management Council
C. Priority Initiatives and Special Concerns Cluster
Undersecretary Markk L. Perete
Core
1. Bureau of Immigration
2. Communications Division
3. Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution
4. International Legal Cooperation
5. Official DOJ Spokesperson
Specialized Units and Programs
1. Office of Cybercrime
2. AO 35 Task Force
3. AO 1 Task Force
4. Office for Competition
5. Presidential Human Rights Committee
6. Computer Emergency Response Team
7. Freedom of Information Implementation
8. Justice Sector Coordinating Council
9. EU-Phi!ippine Justice Support Program and Governance in Justice Sector
Program
10. National Justice Information System
11. Inter-Agency Committee on Good Governance
12. Inter-Agency Anti-Graft Coordinating Council
13. Inter-Agency Committee to Oversee the Review, Implementation and
Monitoring of the United Nations Convention Against Corruption
14. Commission on Filipino Overseas
15. Inter-Agency Freedom of Information Exceptions Policy Committee
16. TWG on Programs and Projects of the Justice Sector Coordinating Council
17. Inter-Agency Task Force on the Employment of Foreign Nationals
18. Intellectual Property Task Force
19. Participatory Governance Cluster
20. National Task Force for the West Philippine Sea

### Page 5

Sub Cluster: Aviation and Ports
Assistant Secretary George Ortha
1. Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines
2. Manila International Airport Authority (MIAA)
3. Mactan-Cebu International Airport Authority (MCIAA)
Special Assignments/Alternate Representative:
Assistant Secretary Margaret C. Padtlla
1. Inter-Agency Freedom of Information Exceptions Policy Committee
Assistant Secretary Neal M. Bainto
1. Bureau of Immigration
2. Office of Cybercrime
3. Office for Competition
4. Intellectual Property Task Force
5. Inter-Agency Committee on Good Governance
6. Participatory Governance Cluster
D. Corrections and internal Affairs Cluster
Undersecretary Deo S. Marco
Core
1. Bureau of Corrections
2. Board of Pardons and Parole
3. Parole and Probation Administration
4. Internal Affairs Unit
Specialized Units and Programs
1. Board of Claims
2. Committee on Bail, Recognizance and Pardon
3. Inter-Agency Executive Committee on Persons Deprived of Liberty
4. Regional Prisons Project
5. Presidential Agrarian Reform Council
6. international Committee of the Red Cross
7. Intramuros Administration Board
8. National Water Resources Board

### Page 6

Sub Cluster: Health and Environment
Assistant Secretary Margaret C. Padilla
1. Philippine National AIDS Council
2. Inter-Agency Committee on Tobacco
3. Smoke-free Environment in Public and Enclosed Places Implementation
4. Task Force Boracay
Special Assignments/Alternate Representative:
Assistant Secretary Margaret C. Padilla
1. Power Sector Assets And Liabilities Management Corporation
2. Presidential Agrarian Reform Council
Assistant Secretary Neal M. Bainto
1. Internal Affairs Unit
E. Administration, Finance and Personnel Services Cluster
Undersecretary Juliana G. Sunga
Core
1. General Administration and Support( GAS), and Support to Operations
(STO)
2. Planning and Management Service
3. Financial Service
4. Administrative Service
5. Committee on Decorum and Investigation of Sexual Harassment Cases
6. Human Resource Merit Promotion and Selection Board
Specialized Units and Programs
1. Bids and Awards Committee
2. Integrity Management System
3. Performance Management Team
4. Management Review and Improvement Committee
5. National Scholarship for Development Program
6. Personnel Selection and Promotions
7. DOJ Program on Awards and Incentives for Service Excellence (PRAISE)
Committee
8. DOJ Provident Fund
9. Public Financial Management Core Team
10. Inter-Agency Task Force on Ease of Doing Business
11. Technical Working Group on Regulatory Review
12. Contracts of Personnel on Job Order/Contracts of Service

### Page 7

13. Records Management Improvement Committee
14. Internal Audit Service
15. DOJ Action Center
16. DOJ Assets Committee
Sub Ouster: Housing, Urban Development, and Public Assistance
Assistant Secretary Sergio Yap II
1. Katarungan Village Committee on Housing
2. Housing and Land Use and Regulatory Board
3. National Drive Against Professional Squatters and Squatting Syndicates
4. Inter-Agency Committee on Institutional Arrangements for Land
Management and Rural Development
5. 8888 Citizen's Complaint Center Focal Person
6. DOJ Action Center
Sub Cluster. Department Performance, Assets Management and Claims
Assistant Secretary Adonis P. Sulit
1. Government Quality Management System
2. Performance Based Bonus
3. Drug-Free workplace Committee or Assessment Committee at the DOJ
Proper
4. Committee on the Disposal of Unserviceable Equipment /Furniture and
Fixtures
5. DOJ Assets Committee
6. Audit Management and Investigation Committee
7. DOJ Performance Management Team
8. Public Financial Management Core Team
9. Retirement Claims
10. Sickness and Death Benefits
Special Assignments/Alternate Representative:
Assistant Secretary Adonis P. Sulit
1. National Privacy Commission
2. National Privacy Commission Data Protection Officer
3. Public Private Partnership Board
4. Government Procurement Policy Board
5. Inter-Agency Task Force on Ease of Doing Business
6. Technical Working Group on Regulatory Review

### Page 8

F. National Prosecution Service
The Prosecutor General
1. National Prosecution Service
2. National Law Enforcement Coordinating Council
3. National Prosecutors Promotions and Selection Board
G. Office of the Chief State Counsel
The Chief State Counsel
1. Legal Staff
2. Free Trade Agreements and Bilateral Investment Treaties
3. Refugees and Stateless Persons
4. Inter-Agency Committee on Milk Ads
All other duties and responsibilities not otherwise delegated remain with the Office
of the Secretary Proper, including:
1. Technical Staff
2. Witness Protection, Security and Benefit Program
3. Judicial and Bar Council
4. Cabinet Assistance System
Assistant Secretary Neal M. Bainto shall act as the Chief of Staff at the Office of
the Secretary Proper.
II. General Provisions. In the implementation of the foregoing delineation of areas of
duties and responsibilities, the following shall be observed:
1. The foregoing delineation of functional areas of duties and responsibility is for
the purpose of assisting the Secretary of Justice in overseeing the operational
activities of the Department in relation to the areas listed above. Nothing
precludes the Secretary of Justice from exercising his discretion to directly act
on matters falling under the areas that have thus been delineated.
2. All matters that require policy-making decisions, and other decisions that are
not merely administrative in nature, including but not limited to, commitments
and undertakings for and in behalf of the Department, non-routine and/or non
recurring financial matters, and the hiring of consultants and the number
thereof, shall be made in consultation with, and with the prior clearance of, the
Secretary of Justice.
In such matters, the primary duty of the concerned official/s is to advise and
assist the Secretary of Justice.

### Page 9

Nonetheless, in case the exigencies of the service In light of attendant
circumstances necessitate prompt action on the part of the Department, the
concerned officials, after attempting and failing to timely obtain prior clearance
from the Secretary of Justice, may provisionally act on matters within their
respective areas of responsibility, subject to the obligation of forthwith
informing the Secretary of Justice of such action, In case the latter may deem
it best to give further or contrary instructions.
3. Unless otherwise provided by law, executive issuance, or othenwise directed
herein or by the Secretary:
a. the Undersecretaries, Chief State Counsel and Prosecutor General shall
have authority to sign all communications and action documents pertaining
to their area of responsibility under this Department Order.
b. Assistant Secretaries shall have the authority to sign all communications
and action documents pertaining to the units and programs falling under
their respective subclusters and special assignments, subject further to the
supervision of the Undersecretary In-charge. The assistance of the
Assistant Secretaries may be required by the Secretary or any of the
Undersecretaries as the exigencies of the service may require.
4. All officials are enjoined to:
a. Keep the Secretary of Justice advised of developments falling under the
areas assigned to them, such as through the submission of reports (e.g..
Monthly Accomplishment Reports, Post-Event Reports, periodic
budgetary/financial reports of offices/committees/councils that have their
own separate funding, etc.) or memoranda on particular Issues or matters;
b. Coordinate and consult with other officials/offlces/agencles, and be mindful
of the primary functions and authority of other officials/offices/agencies in
the Department, keeping in mind that actions/decisions/policy directions
pertaining to one area or office may have an effect on others.
The Department must have a unified, coordinated and consistent view and
position on legal issues and matters of policies.
Department officials who are in charge of offices/committees/councils, etc.
that are made up, in full or In part, by personnel assigned from other offices
within the Department (e.g. Legal Staff, National Prosecution Service, etc.)
shall coordinate with the heads of the concerned mother unit/office with
regard to decisions that would affect the assigned personnel's ability to
discharge their duties or obligations to the mother unit/office (e.g., load
assignments, local or foreign travels, etc.). This Is to ensure efficient

### Page 10

management of resources, including available manpower, of such mother
unit or office.
All Department orders, circulars, and issuances Inconsistent herewith are
hereby revoked. This Order takes effect immediately and shall remain in
force until further orders.
MENARDO I. GUEVARRA
Secretary
2Q 07
10
