# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 024

**Date:** 28 September 2020
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 024
**Subject:** SPONSORSHIP AND FLOOR DELIBERATION ON THE FY 2021 BUDGET PROPOSAL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND ITS ATTACHED/CONSTITUENT AGENCIES
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2020/DC/DC%20024%20dated%20Sept%2028%2C%202020.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC 024 dated Sept 28, 2020.pdf

---

## Subject

SPONSORSHIP AND FLOOR DELIBERATION ON THE FY 2021 BUDGET PROPOSAL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND ITS ATTACHED/CONSTITUENT AGENCIES

## Transcription

### Page 1

KAGAWARAN NG KATARHNGAN
02 4
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.
FOR : L/ndersecrefao^ JULIANA G. SUNGA, DOJ
L/nc/ersecrefao^ ADRIAN FERDINAND S. SUGAY, DOJ
Undersecretary WikRKK L. PERETE, DOJ
Undersecretary DEO L. MARCO, DOJ
Prosecutor Genera/BENEDICTO A. MALCONTENTO, DOJ
Solicitor Genera/JOSE C. CALIDA, OSG
C/)/ef Pt/W/c Attorney PERSIDA V. RUEDA-ACOSTA. RAO
O/C-D/rector ERIC B. DISTOR, NBI
Comm/ss/oner JAIME H. MORENTE, Bi
Ac/n?/n/sttator RENATO D. BERMEJO, LRA
D/rector Genera/GERALD 0. BANTAG, BUCOR
Government Corporate Counsel ELPIDIO J. VEGA, OGCC
OIC-Administrator ALUKU B. ALCALA, PPA
Acting Ctiairman REYNOLD S. MUNSAYAC, PCGG
All Officials, Heads of Programs and Services, and All Concerned
SUBJECT Sponsorship and Floor Deliberation on the FY 2021 Budget
Proposal of the Department of Justice and Its Attached
/Constituent Agencies
DATE 28 September 2020
Please be informed that the sponsorship and floor deliberation on the FY 2021 Budget
Proposal of the Department of Justice and its attached/constituent agencies is set on 06
October 2020, Tuesday, 10:00 A.M.. at Plenary Hall, House of Representatives.
In observance of COVID-19 health protocols, only the officials identified above shall
be allowed to be physically present at the Plenary Hall. Additional ten (10) guests will be
allowed at the holding area.
Unlike the previous hearing. Zoom presentation will not be available. Thus, all
concerned officials are expected to participate.
he
For strict compliance.
MENARDOl. GUEVARRA
Secretary
CO: All concemed. Department of Justice
