# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 030

**Date:** 07 September 2020
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 030
**Subject:** DOJ BAC INTERNAL RULES FOR THE EFFICIENT CONDUCT OF PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES DURING A STATE OF CALAMITY, COMMUNITY QUARANTINE, OR SIMILAR RESTRICTIONS ALLOWING FOR THE PURPOSE ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION AND RECEIPT OF BIDS
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2020/DC/DC030-202009%20DOJ%20BAC%20Internal%20Rules%20for%20the%20Efficient%20Conduct%20of%20Procurement%20Activities%20dtd%2007%20Sep%202020.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC030-202009 DOJ BAC Internal Rules for the Efficient Conduct of Procurement Activities dtd 07 Sep 2020.pdf

---

## Subject

DOJ BAC INTERNAL RULES FOR THE EFFICIENT CONDUCT OF PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES DURING A STATE OF CALAMITY, COMMUNITY QUARANTINE, OR SIMILAR RESTRICTIONS ALLOWING FOR THE PURPOSE ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION AND RECEIPT OF BIDS

## Transcription

### Page 1

•
Rcpublika ng Pilipinas
OH
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.
SUBJECT(cid:9) DOJ BAC INTERNAL RULES FOR THE EFFICIENT
CONDUCT OF PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES DURING A
STATE OF CALAMITY, COMMUNITY QUARANTINE, OR
SIMILAR RESTRICTIONS ALLOWING FOR THE PURPOSE
ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION AND RECEIPT OF BIDS
DATE(cid:9) 07 September 2020
I.(cid:9) OVERVIEW and GENERAL PROVISIONS
On 8 March 2020, the President signed Proclamation No. 922 declaring a State
of Public Health Emergency throughout the Philippines following the confirmed local
transmission of the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Consequently, a
Memorandum from the Office of the Executive Secretary was issued placing the entire
National Capital Region under community quarantine and implementing alternative
work arrangements, among others.
On 07 May 2020, the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) issued
Resolution 09-20201 enjoining procuring entities (PEs) to maximize the use of existing
rules under Republic Act No. 9184, its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
related issuances on the conduct of procurement activities, particularly those meant
to streamline, simplify, and expedite the conduct of procurement and address the
challenges and disruptions brought by calamities and crisis such as the COVID-19
pandemic. Specifically, these rules involve the use of videoconferencing, webcasting,
and similar technology in the conduct of meetings and the use of digital signatures in
procurement related documents.
In view of the foregoing issuances, the Department of Justice - Bids and Awards
Committee (BAC), hereby adopts these Internal Rules For The Efficient Conduct
Of Procurement Activities During A State Of Calamity, Community Quarantine,
Or Similar Restrictions Allowing For The Purpose Electronic Submission And
Receipt Of Bids (Internal Rules).
Approving Measures for the Efficient Conduct of Procurement Activities during a State of Calamity,
or Implementation of Community Quarantine or Similar Restrictions

### Page 2

II. APPLICABILITY
These Internal Rules shall be allowed during a state of calamity, or
implementation of community quarantine, or similar government restrictions, until such
time that the online bidding facility (GPPB Online Portal) under the modernized
Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS) shall have
become available and fully operational.
Once operational, the GPPB Online Portal shall be used by the Department in
accordance with the procedure issued by the GPPB-Technical Support Office (TSO).
III. MEETINGS AND OTHER PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES
SAC meetings, conferences, and other procurement activities, which will have at
least five (5) participants, shall be conducted through videoconferencing using Google
Meet or any other platforms, including:
pre-procurement conference;
pre-bidding conference; and
opening of bids.
The Procurement Management Division (PMD) shall be in charge of setting up
the necessary platform, recording of the videoconference, and preparation of the
minutes of the meeting, which shall be made available not later than five (5) calendar
days after a meeting or procurement activity. The PMD shall be the sole administrator
of the BAC's videoconferences and the sole authority that can allow the entry of
participants.
The SAC-Technical Working Group (TVVG) shall join the SAC during the
aforementioned meetings to assist in matters which require technical expertise.
For determination of quorum for the videoconference, participation of majority of
the total SAC composition as designated by the HOPE shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business, provided, the participation of the Chairperson or Vice
Chairperson is required.
IV. NOTICES
The PMD, as SAC Secretariat, shall send notices to the SAC, TWG, and end-
user representative(s), if applicable, via its official e-mail address at least three (3)
days prior to the scheduled meeting or procurement activity. The PMD shall also
ensure that the SAC members are furnished with copies of the relevant documents for
the meeting, such as the terms of reference (TOR) of the project, activity or program
subject of the meeting, annual procurement plan, and bidding documents, if
applicable.
2

### Page 3

The PMD shall likewise send notices to the Commission on Audit and at least
two (2) observers whenever the meeting or procurement activity requires their
presence under Section 13 of the 2016 IRR of R.A. No. 9184, and such notice shall
be sent at least five (5) calendar days before the scheduled meeting or procurement
activity.
USE OF DIGITAL OR ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
To ensure continuity of public service during a state of calamity, community
quarantine, or similar restrictions, and as part of streamlining the procurement process
of the Department making it adaptable to the advances in modern technology, the
members of the BAC, TWO, and concerned personnel of PMD, through the assistance
of the Department's Information and Communications Technology Service (ICTS), are
encouraged to apply for Philippine National Public Key Infrastructure's (PNPKI) digital
certificates with the Department of Information Communication Technology that will
allow them to digitally sign and encrypt procurement related documents.
For this purpose, those who have been issued PNPKI digital certificates may opt
to digitally sign procurement related documents such as resolutions, abstract of bids,
annual procurement plan, supplemental bid bulletin in lieu of wet or physical signature.
CERTIFICATION
Pursuant to GPPB Resolution No. 12-20202, the highest official managing the
ICTS of the Department shall issue a certification describing the electronic systems or
procedure to be used for the electronic submission and receipt of bids and a statement
that the same is compliant with the abovementioned requirements. The said
certification shall be submitted to the GPPB-TSO prior to posting of the bidding
documents allowing electronic submission and receipt of bids.
SUBMISSION AND RECEIPT OF BIDS
For procurement modalities where a two-envelope procedure or sealed price
quotation is required, the BAC shall determine, on a per project basis, whether it shall
accept submission of bids online or personal, or both.
Regardless of procurement modality, the PMD shall configure the BAC
secretariat e-mail on a per project basis. The configuration shall prevent the premature
or unauthorized opening of online submissions. The premature or unauthorized
opening of online submissions shall be dealt with accordingly pursuant to the penal,
civil, and administrative provisions of R.A. No. 9184.
Approving the Prescribed Form of the Certification Required for the Conduct of Electronic
2
Submission and Receipt of Bids by the Procuring Entities
3

### Page 4

A. Public Bidding
The invitation to bid (ITB), including the bidding documents, shall clearly state
whether the electronic submission and/or personal receipt of bids is/are allowed.
To encourage participation of more bidders, the PMD shall ensure that the links
to the online pre-bidding conference and opening of bids are stated in the ITB.
From the time the ITB is posted until the deadline of the submission of bids, the
PMD shall make the bidding documents available to prospective bidders.
To ensure compliance with the health and safety protocols, aside from direct
payment to the Cashier, the bidding fee may be paid online via the DOJ BAC Trust
Fund Account (LBP 0596-1060-86). Suppliers shall e-mail to PMD a copy of the
validated deposit slip of the online payment so PMD can coordinate the same with the
Cashier. PMD should acknowledge receipt of the validated deposit slip and shall
accordingly e-mail to the suppliers a copy of their respective official receipts.
1.(cid:9) For Online or Electronic Submission3
A Bid Reference Number shall be indicated in the ITB.
Bidders shall submit two (2) password-protected bidding documents in
compressed archive folders with different passwords. The first
compressed archive folder shall contain the legal, technical, and
eligibility requirements under Section 23 of the 2016 IRR of R.A. No.
9184. The second compressed archive folder shall contain the financial
component of the bid.
The password of the compressed archive folders containing bidding
documents will be disclosed only during the scheduled online opening
of bids through the platform's chatbox window. Hence, the presence of
the bidder's representative/s shall be mandatory to ensure the integrity,
security and confidentiality of the bids submitted.
Bids may be submitted via e-mail through bac-secretariat@doi.qov.ph,
copy furnished the PMD via pmd@dol.qov.ph, with the following
"subject" format: <Bid Submission>-<Project Name>. The bidder shall
also include in the e-mail the name of its authorized representative/s
and an acknowledgment that they have understood the rules and
regulations of the Department.
The file type of the documents to be submitted by the prospective bidder
shall be in Portable Document Format (PDF). The archive format must
be a .ZIP file and password protected. The file naming convention shall
be: <bidder's name>_<project name>_<date of bid opening>.
Bid File Submission Guide is attached hereto as "Annex A'
3
4

### Page 5

The file size of the bid submission shall not exceed 15 MB. Hence,
bidders are advised to optimize the size file for easier transmission and
downloading.
The bidder is required to include in its bid submission two (2) file hashes
(SHA 256) of the corresponding archived (.zip) files. It is the bidder's
responsibility that the file hashes submitted in the e-mail shall match
with the hashes of the attached archived files.
Bidders shall make sure that its electronic bid submission is operational
and not corrupted. In the event that the password-protected document
is corrupted and cannot be opened, the bidder shall be disqualified for
failure to submit its bid.
Bids submitted shall be acknowledged through a bid receipt page for the
official time of submission which can be printed by the bidder. For this
purpose, the PMD shall ensure that the BAC Secretariat's e-mail is
always configured per project. Bids shall be submitted through the
aforementioned e-mail at any time before the closing date and time
specified in the bidding documents. Late bids shall not be considered
during the online opening of bid.
Bidding documents which are not in compressed archive folders and are
not password-protected shall be considered as unsealed or unmarked
and shall be rejected and not considered during the bid opening.
k)(cid:9) Bidders may modify or withdraw their bids any time before the deadline
for submission. If a bidder wishes to modify its bid, it shall not be allowed
to retrieve its original bid, but shall only be allowed to send another bid
equally secured and properly identified and labelled as a "modification"
of the one previously submitted. The time indicated in the latest bid
receipt page generated shall be the official time of submission. All bid
modifications shall be made before the deadline for submission of bids
as stated in the ITB or supplemental bid bulletin, if there is any. Bids
submitted after the deadline shall not be accepted and will not be
opened. The PMD shall record in the minutes the bidder's name, its
representative participating if there is any, and the time the late bid was
e-mailed.
I)(cid:9) The prospective bidder submitting bids online shall notify and inform the
PMD through telephone number 8526-2753 or through e-mail address
pmddoi.qov.oh of the fact of their electronic submission of bids.
m) Any question or clarification with regard to the technical specification,
TOR, scope of work of any of the program, project, or activity, or any
part of the bidding documents may be sent via e-mail through bac-
secretariatdoi.qov.ph, copy furnished the PMD via pmd©doi.qov.ph,
5

### Page 6

at least seven (7) calendar days before the deadline of submission of
bids. Decisions of the BAC amending any provision of the bidding
documents shall be issued in writing through a supplemental/bid bulletin
at least seven (7) calendar days before the deadline of submission and
receipt of bids.
2.(cid:9) For Personal or Manual Submission
For bidders who opt to submit manually, the rules under the 2016 IRR
of R.A. No. 9184 shall govern their bid submission.
Upon submission of bids, the bidder shall be required to provide an
e-mail address where the PMD will send the link for the online opening
of bids. Considering that their bid submission does not require a
password, bidders who opt to submit manually may or may not attend
the online bid opening.
The PMD shall have custody of the submitted bids and shall ensure
its security, integrity, and confidentiality. The unauthorized opening of
the bids prior to its official opening shall be considered a criminal act
punishable under R.A. No. 9184.
The bids shall be opened by the member/s of the TWG, as designated
by the BAC during its scheduled online opening of bids. Health and
safety protocols, such as wearing of personal protective equipment,
social distancing, and presence of not more than five (5) persons shall
be strictly observed.
To ensure transparency and accurate representation of the bid submission,
the PMD shall notify in writing all bidders whose bids it has received whether
online/electronic or personal/manual through its PhilGEPS-registered official e-
mail address. The notice shall be issued within seven (7) calendar days from the
date of the bid opening.
B.(cid:9) Alternative Modes of Procurement
In alternative modalities which require the preparation of a Request for Quotation
(RFQ), the manner by which the price quotations are to be submitted shall also be
prescribed as part of the terms and conditions, i.e., sealed or open quotation. Further,
the RFQ shall indicate whether the quotation shall be received in person or through
other means such as registered mail, facsimile or e-mail via bac-
secretariat@doi qov. ph.
Whenever the RFQ states that price quotations should be submitted sealed and
the prospective suppliers opt to submit price quotations online, the following rules shall
govern:
6

### Page 7

a.(cid:9) a Reference Number shall be indicated in the RFQ.
the file type of the documents to be submitted by the prospective supplier
shall be in PDF. The archive format must be a .ZIP file and password
protected. The file naming convention shall be: <bidder's name>_<project
name>_<deadline of submission of price quotation>;
the password of the compressed archive folder containing the price
quotations will be disclosed on a later date after the deadline of the
submission of RFQs, in person, face-to-face through videoconferencing,
webcasting, or other similar technology; and
the submitted price quotations and supporting documents shall be
acknowledged through a bid receipt page for the official time of submission
which can be printed by the bidder. For this purpose, the PMD shall ensure
that the BAC Secretariat's e-mail is always configured per project. Price
quotations shall be submitted through the aforementioned e-mail at any
time before the closing date and time specified in the bidding documents.
Late submissions shall no longer be considered.
Submitted price quotations shall then be transmitted by the PMD to the BAC
TWG. The transmittal shall state the prospective suppliers who submitted quotations,
manual or online, and other important details of the project. The PMD shall not open
price quotations earlier than the deadline stated in the REQ.
The BAC TWG shall then prepare the abstract of quotations within three (3)
calendar days from receipt. The PMD shall have the same period from receipt of the
abstract of quotations within which to prepare the appropriate BAC resolution.
VIII. EVALUATION OF THE ELIGIBILITY DOCUMENTS
The eligibility documents shall be submitted pursuant to the following
provisions of the 2016 I RR of R.A. No. 9184:
a Section 23 Eligibility Requirements for the Procurement of Goods and
Infrastructure Projects;
b Section 24 Eligibility Requirements and Short Listing for Consulting
Services; and
c Section 27 Bid Security.
As provided in GPPB Resolution No. 09-2020, in consideration of the limited
access to financial institutions, regulatory and other offices, as well as the
implementation of government restrictions on transport and travel, the
following documents are allowed to be accepted as alternate documentary
requirements for procurement activities during a state of calamity, or
7

### Page 8

implementation of community quarantine or similar restrictions declared or
being implemented either in the locality of the Department or of the bidder, to
wit:
unnotarized Bid Securing Declaration;
expired Business or Mayor's permit with Official Receipt of renewal
application, subject to submission of Business or Mayor's permit after
award of contract but before payment;
unnotarized Omnibus Sworn Statement subject to compliance therewith
after award of contract but before payment; and
Performance Securing Declaration (PSD) in lieu of a performance security
to guarantee the winning bidder's faithful performance of obligations under
the contract, subject to the following:
dl. similar to the PSD used in Framework Agreement, such declaration
shall state, among others, that the winning bidder shall be blacklisted
from being qualified to participate in any government procurement
activity for one (1) year, in case of first offense, or two (2) years, if with
prior similar offense, in the event it violates any of the conditions
stated in the contract;
an unnotarized PSD may be accepted, subject to submission of a
notarized PSD before payment, unless the same is replaced with a
performance security in the prescribed form, as stated below; and
the end-user may require the winning bidder to replace the submitted
PSD with a performance security in any of the prescribed forms under
Section 39.2 of the 2016 IRR of R.A. No. 9184 upon lifting of the State
of Calamity, or community quarantine or similar restrictions, as the
case may be.
In any event, the BAC shall always determine or validate the existence of
the state of calamity or implementation of community quarantine or similar
restrictions and may require the submission of documentary proof for this
purpose.
The Department reserves its right to issue additional internal rule/s and/or
guideline/s on electronic submission and receipt of bids, which are consistent
with the provisions of R.A. No. 9184 and related GPPB issuances on
procurement when prevailing circumstances relative to a particular procurement
so warrant.
8

### Page 9

IX. EFFECTIVITY
These guidelines shall take effect immediately and shall remain in force unless
sooner modified or revoked.
MENARDO I. GUEVARRA
Secretary
Department o Justice
.111
niUn
9

### Page 10

(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)
Annex A
BID SUBMISSION FILE GUIDE
1.(cid:9) Files to be submitted must be password-protected .ZIP files with the following filename
format:
<bidder's name>_<project name>_financial_<date of bid opening>.zip
This file contains a folder named financial
<bidder's name>_<project name>jechnical_<date of bid opening>.zip
This file contains a folder named: technical-eligibility
2.(cid:9) The financial folder must contain the following filename:
financialproposal.pdf (cid:9) scanned copy of Financial Proposal
3.(cid:9) The technical-eligibility folder must contain the following filename:
philgeps.pdf - scanned copy of PhilGEPS Certificate of
Registration
ongoing.pdf scanned copy of statement of the
prospective bidder of all its ongoing
government and private contracts,
including contracts.
sicc.pdf (cid:9) scanned copy of the bidder's Single
Largest Completed Contract (SLCC)
nfcc.pdf scanned copy of the prospective bidder's
computation of its Net Financial
Contracting Capacity (NFCC)
jva.pdf scanned copy of the valid Joint Venture
Agreement (JVA)
bidsecuringdeclaration.pdf (cid:9) - scanned copy of the bid security in the
prescribed form, amount and validity
period or Bid Securing Declaration.
technicalspecs.pdf (cid:9) - scanned copy of Technical Specification
(cid:9)
swomstatementpdf - scanned copy of sworn statement by the
prospective bidder or its duly authorized
representative.
10
