# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 016

**Date:** 12 April 2022
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 016
**Subject:** RECEIPT REQUIREMENTS FOR REIMBURSEMENT/LIQUIDATION OF EXPENSES
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2022/DC/DC%20016%20dated%2012%20April%202022%20-%20Receipt%20Requirements%20for%20REimbursement-%20Liquidation%20of%20Expenses.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC 016 dated 12 April 2022 - Receipt Requirements for REimbursement- Liquidation of Expenses.pdf

---

## Subject

RECEIPT REQUIREMENTS FOR REIMBURSEMENT/LIQUIDATION OF EXPENSES

## Transcription

### Page 1

ICAGAWARAN NG KATARUNGAN
6
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 0 1
SUBJECT(cid:9) :(cid:9) Receipt Requirements for Reimbursement/Liquidation of
Expenses
DATE(cid:9) APR 12 2022
In the interest of the service and pursuant to Commission on Audit Circular No.
2021-001 dated 24 June 2021, re: "Clarification on the use of Reimbursement Expense
Receipt (RER) and Certification in relation to reimbursement of expenses not requiring
Official Receipts (ORs)," the documents specified below shall be required as proof of
payment for reimbursement/liquidation of expenses:
Particulars Documents Required
Expenses(cid:9) regardless(cid:9) of(cid:9) amount(cid:9) purchased
from/rendered(cid:9) by(cid:9) establishments(cid:9) issuing OR/ Invoice
receipts/invoice
Expenses amounting to P300.00 or less purchased
Certification(cid:9) of(cid:9) Expenses not
from/rendered(cid:9) by(cid:9) establishments(cid:9) not(cid:9) issuing
Requiring Receipts (CENRR)
receipts/invoice
Expenses amounting to more than P300.00 but not
exceeding P1,000.00 purchased from/rendered by RER
establishments not issuing receipt/invoice
Accordingly, OR shall be used for purchases of services and/or lease of properties,
while invoice shall be used for purchase of goods and/or properties.' Payment of fares in
public utility vehicles issuing receipts, i.e., bus, train, vessel/ship, shall be supported with
an official receipt, even if the amount is P300.00 or less.
It is understood that all reimbursement/liquidation of expenses shall be subject to
accounting and auditing rules and regulations.
This Circular takes effect immediately and shall remain in force unless sooner
amended.
For strict compliance.
arta."'
MENARDO I. GUEVARRA
Secretary
Copy furnished:
Departmen of Justice
All concerned.
CN 0202204105
'Revenue Memorandum Circular No. 2-2014 of the Bureau of Internal Revenue.
