# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 041

**Date:** 23 December 2022
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 041
**Subject:** ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 02 DATED 16 DECEMBER 2022
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2022/DC/DC%20No.%20041%20dated%20December%2023%2C%202022%20-%20Administrative%20Order%2002%20dated%20December%2016%2C%202022.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC No. 041 dated December 23, 2022 - Administrative Order 02 dated December 16, 2022.pdf

---

## Subject

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 02 DATED 16 DECEMBER 2022

## Transcription

### Page 1

0/ Republika ng Pilipinas
041
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.
TO The Undersecretaries/Assistant Secretaries
Heads of Bureaus, Commissions and
Offices attached to the DOJ
The Prosecutor General/ Prosecution Staff of the Office
Of the Secretary
The Chief State Counsel/State Counsels
Chiefs of Service and Staff
Staff of the Office of the Secretary
Regional/Provlnclal/City Prosecutors
Records Management Section
DOJ Library
All Concerned
SUBJECT: ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO.0 2 DATED 16 DECEMBER 2022
DATE DEC 2 3 2022
Attached Is a copy of Administrative Order No. 02 dated 16 December 2022,
signed by Executive Secretary Lucas P. Bersamin entitled "AUTHORIZING THE
ONE-TIME GRANT OF RICE ASSISTANCE TO ALL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES
AND WORKERS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022"
Let the certified copy thereof be kept in the DOJ Records Management Section.
For information and guidance.
JESUS C IPIN C. REMULLA
>ecretary
CN; 0202212230
End.: As stated.

### Page 2

DOJ/FRONTUNE
#ffkB ai thB Prestbent r}a_Cvcz!i:iD_i7c::!p'x
" DECiggop!!]'
of the
^alacanang
RECORDS
nMt
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE
SECRETARY JESUS CRISPIN C. REMULLA
Sir :
I have the honor to transmit for your information and guidance certified
copies of the following Administrative Orders ;
1. Administrative Order No. 1 dated December 16, 2022 entitled
^'AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF SERVICE RECOGNITION
INCENTIVE TO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES FOR FISCAL YEAR
2022."
2. Administrative Order No. 2 dated December 16, 2022 entitled
"AUTHORIZING THE ONE-TIME GRANT OF RICE ASSISTANCE
TO ALL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES AND WORKERS FOR FISCAL
YEAR 2022."
Thank you.
Very truly yours.
ATTY. CONCEPCION ZENNY^^.. FFEERRRPXJtINO- ENAD
Director IV
M-128 Mabini Hall, Malacanang, Manila Trunkline 784-4286 loc. 4029/ 4123/ 4153

### Page 3

MALACANAN PALACE
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 02
AUTHORIZING THE ONE-TIME GRANT OF RICE ASSISTANCE TO ALL
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES AND WORKERS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022
WHEREAS, the Administration recognizes all employees and workers In government
for their collective and unceasing participation in and invaluable contribution to the efficient and
responsive delivery of services to the public, especially in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic;
WHEREAS, the grant of assistance in the form of rice to workers and employees in
government will help mitigate the effects of the current socio-economic challenges in their
respective households;
WHEREAS,t he benefit to be gained from the grant of the said assistance will be two-fold
as it will not only benefit those working in the government but will also result in better economic
opportunities for those in the agricultural sector;
WHEREAS,t he grant of rice assistance will not only benefit our public servants, but also
boost domestic production and help local Filipino farmers, consistent with the policy of the
Administration towards economic recovery and transformation;
WHEREAS, Section 5 of Presidential Decree No. 1597 (s. 1987) provides that
allowances, honoraria and other fringe benefits which may be granted to government
employees, whether payable by their respective offices or by other agencies of government
shall be subject to the approval of the President, upon recommendation of the Secretary of the
Department of Budget and Management( DBM);
WHEREAS, under Item XXXVIII {Special Provisions) of Republic Act( RA) No. 11639 or
the "General Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year( FY)2 022," Contingent Fund covers the funding
requirements of new or urgent activities or projects of national government agencies (NGAs),
government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOGGs), and local government units (LGUs)
that need to be implemented or paid during the year;
WHEREAS, pursuant to RA No. 11203, the National Food Authority (NFA) shall
maintain sufficient rice buffer stock to be sourced solely from local farmers, and to dispose of
the same as may be necessary, provided that storage, sale, and distribution of stocks shall be
done in accordance with existing rules and regulations; and
THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

### Page 4

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the power
of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;
NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS,J R., President of the Philippines, by
virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:
Section 1. Rice Assistance for National Government Employees and Workers. This
Order authorizes the grant of a one-time assistance at a uniform quantity of twenty-five (25)
kilograms of rice for each of the following personnel of the National Government:
a. Civilian personnel in NGAs, including those in state universities and colleges (SUCs),
GOCCs, government financial institutions (GFIs), government instrumentalities with
corporate powers, and government corporate entities, occupying regular, contractual, or
casual positions;
b. Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the Department of
National Defense, and uniformed personnel of the Philippine National Police, Bureau of
Fire Protection, and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology under the Department of
the Interior and Local Government, the Bureau of Corrections under the Department of
Justice, the Philippine Coast Guard under the Department of Transportation, and the
National Mapping and Resource Information Authority under the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources; and
c. Individuals and groups of people whose services are engaged through job orders (JO),
contracts of service (COS), or others similarly situated as defined under Sections 6.2
and 6.3 of the Commission on Audit-DBM Joint Circular (JC) No. 2 dated October 20,
2020, as amended.
Section 2. Conditions on the Grant of Rice Assistance. The grant of rice assistance
shall be subject to the following conditions:
a. The beneficiaries are government employees and workers under Section 1 hereof; and
b. The beneficiaries are still in the government service and/or engaged by government
agencies as of 30 November 2022.
Section 3. Exclusion from the Grant of Rice Assistance. The following are excluded
from the grant of rice assistance:
a. Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform activities or services
with expected outputs;
b. Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework basis;
c. Student workers and apprentices; and
d. Workers hired through institutional contract of service who are assigned in government
agencies.

### Page 5

Section 4. Funding Source of Rice Assistance for Employees and COS/JO
Workers in the National Government. The funding source for the grant of the rice assistance
to National Government employees and workers shall be governed by the following:
a. For NGAs, including SUCs, and military and uniformed personnel, the amount required
shall be charged against the Contingent Fund under RA No. 11639, subject to
compliance with relevant laws, rules, and regulations; and
b. For GOGGs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective approved
corporate operating budgets( GOBs)f or FY 2022 only.
Section 5. Rice Assistance for Employees and COS/JO Workers in the Legislative
and Judicial Departments and Other Offices Vested with Fiscal Autonomy. Employees
and workers of the Senate, House of Representatives, Judiciary, Office of the Ombudsman
and Constitutional Offices vested with fiscal autonomy may likewise be granted by their
respective heads of office a one-time rice assistance at a uniform quantity of twenty-five (25)
kilograms of rice each, chargeable against the available released allotment of their respective
agencies, subject to the conditions set forth under Section 2 hereof. Should the identified
funding source prove insufficient to cover the maximum allowable quantity of rice assistance,
a lower but uniform quantity thereof shall be given to all qualified employees of the agency or
GOGG concerned.
Section 6. Rice Assistance for Employees and COS/JO Workers In LGUs.
Employees and workers in LGUs, including those in the barangays, may likewise be granted
by their respective sanggunians, a one-time rice assistance at a uniform quantity of twenty-five
(25) kilograms of rice each, depending on the LGU's financial capability, subject to the pertinent
provisions under RA No. 7160 or the "Local Government Gode of 1991," and the conditions set
forth under Section 2 hereof, chargeable against their respective FY 2022 local government
funds. Should the identified funding source prove insufficient to cover the maximum allowable
quantity of rice assistance, a lower but uniform quantity thereof shall be given to all qualified
employees of the LGU concerned.
Section 7. Rice Assistance for Employees and COS/JO Workers in Local Water
Districts (LWDs). Employees and workers in LWDs may likewise be granted by their
respective Boards of Directors( BOD)a one-time rice assistance at a uniform quantity of twenty-
five (25) kilograms of rice each, chargeable against their respective BCD-approved FY 2022
GOBs only, subject to the conditions set forth under Section 2 hereof. Should the identified
funding source prove insufficient to cover the maximum allowable quantity of rice assistance,
a lower but uniform quantity thereof shall be given to all qualified employees of the LWD
concerned.
Section 8. Rice Assistance for Employees and COS/JO Workers In Agencies
Exempted from the Coverage of RA No. 6758, as Amended. NGAs and GOGGs exempted
from the coverage of RA No. 6758, as amended, or the "Gompensation and Position
Glassification Act of 1989," may also grant rice assistance to their employees and workers at a
uniform quantity to be determined by their governing boards or agency heads, which shall not
exceed twenty-five (25) kilograms of rice each, chargeable against the NGA's available funds
and the GOGG's FY 2022 GOB, subject to the conditions set forth under Section 2 hereof.
Should the identified funding source prove insufficient to cover the maximum allowable rice

### Page 6

assistance, a lower but uniform quantity thereof shall be given to all qualified employees of the
concerned agency.
Section 9. Implementing Guidelines. Within ten (10) days from the effectivity of this
Order, the NFA, in consultation with the Department of Agriculture and the DBM, shall issue
the necessary guidelines to effectively implement this Order, including the efficient and
effective mechanisms for the distribution of the abovementioned rice assistance.
Section 10. Repeal. All other issuances, administrative rules and regulations, or parts
thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
Section 11. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
Section 12. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its publication
in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
DONE, in the City of Manila, this 16 th day of December ,i n the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.
By the President:
CiUce of bie
MAUCANAM6 RECOftDS CSRm
lE^ebutive Secretary
CEIITI C@PY
PlRgCTORB?
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PBBM001127
