# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 029

**Date:** 13 September 2022
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 029
**Subject:** DELINEATION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2022/DC/DC%20029%20dated%2013%20September%202022.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC 029 dated 13 September 2022.pdf

---

## Subject

DELINEATION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

## Transcription

### Page 1

D_a_
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.
SUBJECT DELINEATION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
DATE
SEP 1 3 2022
I Delegation of Duties and Responsibilities. In the interest of service and pursuant
to existing laws, the following areas of duties and responsibilities are hereby delegated
to the following officials of the Department:
A. Law Enforcement Cluster
Undersecretary JESSE HERMOGENES T. ANDRES
Core
1 National Prosecution Service
2 Office of the Secretary of Justice Prosecution Staff
3 National Bureau of Investigation
4. Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution
Specialized Units, Programs, and Committees
1. National Competitiveness Council
2. Cabinet Cluster on Security, Justice and Peace
3. National Intelligence Coordinating Agency
4. National Security Council
5. Task Force on Normalization
6. National Law Enforcement Coordinating Committee
7. Presidential Human Rights Committee
8, Administrative Order (AO) 35 Task Force
9. AO 1 Task Force
10. Anti-Money Laundering Council
11. Dangerous Drugs Board
12. Inter-Agency Committee on Anti-Illegal Drugs (ICAD)
13. Task Force Drug Courier
14. TWG to Draft the Unified Manual for the filing of Drug Cases
15. Drug-Free Workplace Committee or Assessment Committee at the DOJ
Proper
International Narcotics Control Board
Intellectual Property Task Force
Privatization Council
High-Level Sub-Committee of the National Crisis Management Committee

### Page 2

The Prosecutor General
1 Office of the Secretary of Justice Prosecution Staff
2. Administrative Supervision over Prosecution Offices in the National Capital
Region1
3 Chairperson of the National Prosecutors Selection and Promotion Board
B. Legal Services and Liaison Cluster
Undersecretary RAUL T. VASQUEZ
Alternate Representative: Assistant Secretary RANDOLPH A. PASCASIO
Core
1. Legal Staff
2. Office of the Solicitor General
3. DOJ Legislative Liaison Office
Specialized Units, Programs, and Committees
1. International Legal Cooperation
2. Judicial and Bar Council
3. Justice Sector Coordinating Council (JSCC)
4. Freedom of Information Implementation
5. Inter-Agency Freedom of Information Exceptions Policy Committee
6. Presidential Decree (PD) No. 242 Proceedings
7. Appeals on Municipal Tax Ordinances and Revenue Measures
8. National Task Force for the West Philippine Sea
9. Inter-Agency Team for Federalism Information and Advocacy Campaign
10. US-Philippines Partnership for Growth
11. Philippine Development Forum
12. Cabinet Cluster on Economic Development
13. Trust Fund Management Committee (TFMC) of the Coconut Farmers and
Industry Trust Fund
14. Public Sector Labor Managernent Council
15. Committee for the Special Protection of Children
16. Committee on Women and Children
17. Committee on Gender and Development
18. Juvenile Justice Welfare Council
19. Council for the Welfare of Children
20. National Council Against Child Labor
21. Inter-Agency Council Against Child Pornography
22. Inter-Agency Committee on Children in Situations of Armed Conflict
23. Inter-Agency Committee on Violence against Women and Children
24. Inter-Agency Committee on Diversity and Inclusion
25. Governing Board of the National Council on Disability Affairs
26. National Coordinating and Monitoring Board for Senior Citizens
Committee on Decorum and Investigation of Sexual Harassment Cases
Indigenous Peoples Concerns
lrsuant to Section 6. ReDublic Act No. 10071 otherwise known as the "ProsecutIon Service Act of 2010.”
in relation to Section 38 (2) Chapter 7, Book IV of Executive Order No. 292 otherwise known as the
“ Administrative Code of 1987.”
2

### Page 3

The Chief State Counsel
1 Legal Staff
2 Free Trade Agreements and Bilateral Investment Treaties
3 Refugees and Stateless Persons
4 Inter-Agency Committee on Milk Ads
C. Immigration and Special Concerns Cluster
Undersecretary JOSE R. CADIZ, JR.
Alternate Representative: Assistant Secretary MAJKEN ANIKA S. GRAN-ONG
Core
1. Bureau of Immigration
2. Public Attorney’s Office
Specialized Units and Committees
1. Inter-Agency Committee on Passport Irregularities
2. Philippine Statistics Authority
3. GRP Monitoring Committee
4. Task Force Balik-Loob
5. Task Force Bangon Marawi
6. National Coast Watch Council
7. Commission on Maritime and Ocean Affairs
8. Philippine Committee Against Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing
9. Committee on Oil and Gas Exploration in the West Philippines Sea
10. Participatory Governance Cluster
11. Inter-Agency Committee on Good Governance
12. Inter-Agency Committee to Oversee the Review, Implementation and
Monitoring of the United Nations Convention Against Corruption
13. Inter-Agency Anti-Graft Coordinating Council
14. Mining Industry Coordinating Council
15. Evidence Management Project
16. Commission on Filipino Overseas
17. Inter-Agency Task Force on the Employment of Foreign Nationals
D. Corrections Cluster
Undersecretary DEO L. MARCO
Alternate Representative: Assistant Secretary JOSE DOMINIC F. CLAVANO
Core
1. Bureau of Corrections
2. Board of Pardons and Parole
3. Parole and Probation Administration
Specialized Units, Programs, and Committees
1. Board of Claims
. Committee on Bail, Recognizance and Pardon
. Inter-Agency Executive Committee on Persons Deprived of Liberty
. Regional Prisons Project
3

### Page 4

5. Katarungan Village Committee on Housing
6 Presidential Agrarian Reform Council Executive Committee
7 International Committee of the Red Cross
8 National Water Resources Board
9 Philippine National AIDS Council
10 Inter-Agency Committee on Tobacco
11 Task Force Boracay
12 Manila Bay Task Force
13 Smoke-free Environment in Public and Enclosed Places Implementation
14. Typhoon Yolanda Rehabilitation and Recovery Efforts
E. Priority Sectors Cluster
Undersecretary GERONIMO L. SY
Core
1. Presidential Commission on Good Government
2. Office of the Government Corporate Counsel
Specialized Units, Programs, and Committees
1. Office for Competition
2. Criminal Code Committee
3. Power Sector Assets and Liabilities Management Corporation
4. DOJ-DOE Task Force Monitoring the Oil Deregulation Law Implementation
5. Inter-Agency Energy Contingency Committee (Oil Contingency Task Force)
6. Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines
7, Manila International Airport Authority (MIAA)
8. Mactan-Cebu International Airport Authority (MCIAA)
9. Davao International Airport Authority (DIAA)
10. Nuclear Energy Program Inter-Agency Committee
F. Human Security and Privacy Cluster
Undersecretary NICHOLAS FELIX L. TY
Alternate Representative; Assistant Secretary JOSE ARTURO R. MALVAR
Core
1. Inter-Agency Council Against Trafficking
Specialized Units and Programs
1, Anti-Terrorism Council
2. National Privacy Commission
3. Data Protection Officer
4. EU-Philippine Justice Support Program and Governance in Justice Sector
Program (GoJust)
National Justice Information System (NJtS)
Presidential Task Force Against Illegal Recruitment
Philippine Board on Organ Donation and Transplantation
Intramuros Administration Board
National Price Coordinating Council
4

### Page 5

G. Finance, Administration, and Personnel Services Cluster
Undersecretary BRIGIDO J. DULAY
Alternate Representative: OIC Assistant Secretary SAPP GABRIEL LORENZO
L. IGNACIO
Core
1 Planning and Management Service
2 Financial Service
3 Administrative Service
4. Internal Audit Service
Specialized Units, Programs, and Committees
1. Inter-Agency Task Force on Emerging Infectious Diseases
2. National Task Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict
3. National and Regional Bids and Awards Committee
4. Government Procurement Policy Board
5. Integrity Management System
6. Government Quality Management System
7. Performance Management Team
8. Management Review and Improvement Committee
9. Inter-Agency Task Force on Ease of Doing Business
10. Audit Management and Investigation Committee
11. Human Resource Merit Promotion and Selection Board
12. National Scholarship for Development Program
13. DOJ Program on Awards and Incentives for Service Excellence (PRAISE)
Committee
14 SALN Review and Compliance Committee
15 DOJ Provident Fund
16 DOJ Assets Committee
17 Public Financial Management Core Team
18 Retirement Claims
19 Sickness and Death Benefits
20 Records Management Improvement Committee
21 Justice System Infrastructure Program
22. Committee on the Disposal of Unserviceable Equipment /Furniture and
Fixtures
23 National Drive Against Professional Squatters and Squatting Syndicates
24. Inter-Agency Committee on Institutional Arrangements for Land
Management and Rural Development
25 8888 Citizen’s Complaint Center Focal Person
26 DOJ Action Center
27 Public Private Partnership Board
28. Technical Working Group on Regulatory Review
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Cluster
Assistant Secretary JOSE ARTURO R. MALVAR
Core
1. Information and Communications Technology Service
5

### Page 6

Specialized Units, Programs, and Committees
1 . National Cybersecurity Inter-Agency Committee
2. Computer Emergency Response Team
1. Assistant Secretary JOSE DOMINIC F. CLAVANO
Core
1. DOJ Spokesperson
2.
Communications Division
3. Internal Affairs Unit – National Prosecution Service
All other duties and responsibilities not otherwise delegated remain with the Office
of the Secretary Proper, including:
1 Land Registration Administration
2 Technical Staff
3 Witness Protection, Security and Benefit Program
4 Office of Cybercrime
5 Cabinet Assistance System
Undersecretary BRIGIDO J. DULAY shall act as the Chief of Staff of the Office of
the Secretary Proper.
11. Unless otherwise provided by law, executive issuance, or otherwise directed herein or
by the Secretary:
a. The Undersecretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Chief State Counsel and Prosecutor
General shall have authority to sign all communications and action documents
pertaining to their respective areas of responsibilities under this Circular.
b. The Assistant Secretaries, as alternate representatives, shall have authority to sign
all communications and action documents pertaining to the units and programs
falling under their respective special assignments, subject to the supervision of the
Undersecretary-in-charge, if applicable. The assistance of Assistant Secretaries
may be required by the Secretary or any of the Undersecretaries as the exigencies
of the service may require.
c. All documents, papers, letters, communications, information and other matters
pertaining to the offices and proceedings for the attention and/or action by the
Secretary of Justice shall be coursed through the Undersecretary to whom the
specific subject matter is delegated as provided in this Circular.
111 In the implementation of the foregoing delineation of areas of duties and
responsibilities, atI the above mentioned personnel are enjoined to keep the Secretary
of Justice advised of developments falling under the areas assigned to them, such as
through the submission of reports (e.g., Monthly Accomplishment Reports, Post-Event
Reports, periodic budgetary/financial reports of offices/committees/councils that have
their own separate funding, etc.) or memoranda on particular issues or matters.
All officials are enjoined to coordinate and consult with other officials/offices/agencies,
and be mindful of the primary functions and authority of other officials/offices/agencies
6

### Page 7

in the Department, keeping in mind that actions/decisions/policy directions pertaining
to one area or office may have an effect on others.
All Department orders, circulars, and issuances inconsistent herewith are hereby
revoked. This Circular takes effect immediately and shall remain in forle until further orders.
\+ UU
qU
JESUS
.
C. REMULLA
i
CN= 0202209148
I11\II11111111111HIllIIIIHIlIIlIIll
