# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 022

**Date:** 11 April 2023
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 022
**Subject:** DELINEATION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2023/DC_2023/DC%20No.%2022%20dated%20April%2011%2C%202023%20SUBJECT%20%20Delineation%20of%20Duties%20and%20Responsibilities%20(IACAT)%20of%20Asec.%20Jose%20Dominic%20F.%20Clavano%20and%20Asec%20Francis%20John%20L.%20%20Tejano_0001.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC No. 22 dated April 11, 2023 SUBJECT  Delineation of Duties and Responsibilities (IACAT) of Asec. Jose Dominic F. Clavano and Asec Francis John L.  Tejano_0001.pdf

---

## Subject

DELINEATION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

## Transcription

### Page 1


DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR No. { 2 2
SUBJECT =: DELINEATION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

DATE APR 11 2023

In the interest of the service and pursuant to the provisions of existing laws,
Department Circular (D.C.) No. 029 dated 13 September 2022 (Re: Delineation of
Duties and Responsibilities) is hereby specifically amended as follows:

1. Assistant Secretary JOSE DOMINIC F. CLAVANO IV is hereby
designated as the alternate representative of Undersecretary Nicholas
Felix L. Ty for Communications and Policy Matters of the Inter-Agency
Council Against Trafficking (IACAT); and

2. Assistant Secretary FRANCIS JOHN L. TEJANO is hereby designated
as the alternate representative of Undersecretary Nicholas Felix L. Ty
for Operations and Administrative Matters of the |ACAT.

Assistant Secretary Clavano and Assistant Secretary Tejano shall continue to
perform their other duties and responsibilities under D.C. No. 029, s. 2022 not
otherwise included in the IACAT. In addition to the foregoing, they may hereafter be
designated by the Secretary to perform such other functions, duties and
responsibilities as will be required by the exigency of the service.

Further, the general provisions of D.C. No. 029, s. 2022, as amended, shall
continue to govern the implementation of this Circular.

All Department Orders, Circulars, and issuances inconsistent herewith are
hereby revoked. This Circular takes effect immediately and shall remain in force until
further orders. |

: 0202304076

MOU

Copy furnished:
All concerned.
