# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 026

**Date:** 18 May 2023
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 026
**Subject:** NATIONAL BUDGET MEMORANDUM NO. 147 DATED 29 MARCH 2023
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2023/DC_2023/DC%20026%20dated%2018%20May%202023.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC 026 dated 18 May 2023.pdf

---

## Subject

NATIONAL BUDGET MEMORANDUM NO. 147 DATED 29 MARCH 2023

## Transcription

### Page 1

026
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.
TO All Undersecretaries/Assistant Secretaries
All Heads of Bureaus, Commissions and Offices attached to
the Department
All Regional/Provincial/City Prosecutors of the National
Prosecution Service
Prosecutor General
Chief State Counsel
Heads of Services/Offices/Programs
Staff in the Office of the Secretary
Records Management Section
DOJ Library
All Concerned
SUBJECT National Budget Memorandum No. 147 dated 29 March 2023
DATE MAY 1 8 2023
Attached is the copy of National Budget Memorandum No. 147 dated 29 March
2023, issued by the Department of Budget and Management entitled, “BUDGET
PRIORITIES FRAMEWORK FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE FY 2024 AGENCY
BUDGET PROPOSALS UNDER TIER 2”.
Let the certified copy thereof be kept in the DOJ Records Management Section.
For information and guidance.
JESUS ChR GC. REMULLA
rcretary
CN : 0202305245
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII

### Page 2

’0 VFI DIAI
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES gS teAS &
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEME
GENERAL SOLANO STREET. SAN MIGUEL, MANILA
NATIONAL BUDGET MEMORANDUM No. 147
Date®l 29, 2023
For All Heads of Departments, Agencies, Bureaus, Offices, Commissions,
State Universities and Colleges, Other tnstrumentalities of the
National Government, and all Others Concerned
Subject BUDGET PRIORITIES FRAMEWORK FOR THE PREPARATION OF
THE FY 2024 AGENCY BUDGET PROPOSALS UNDER TIER 2
1.0 PURPOSE
This FY 2024 National Budget Memorandum (NBM) is being issued to provide the
departments, agencies, and other entities with the following:
1.1 The key strategies and programs/projects which will be prioritized for funding under
the fiscal space for Tier 2 as they respond to emerging directions of the priority sectors
of the Marcos Jr. Administration consistent with the Philippine Development Plan
(PDP) 2023-2028l;
1.2 The specific guidelines in the formulation of the Tier 2 proposals which shall be
submitted on April 30, 2023;
1,3 The FY 2024-2026 Tier 1 Budget Ceilings of Departments and Agencies (Annex A);
and
1.4 The FY 2024 Budget Preparation Activities with Revised Schedule (Annex B).
The macroeconomic assumptions and fiscal aggregates for the FY 2024 National Budget
as approved by the Development Budget Coordination Commi Hee (DBCC), as well as the
information on the resulting fiscal space, shall be issued separately.
2.0 EXPENDITURE DIRECTIONS FOR FY 2024
The National Government shall continue to foster economic and social transformation to
address the economic scarring due to the pandemic and to mitigate the effects of high
inflation on basic commodities. Priority will be given to shovel-ready infrastructure projects,
investments in human capital development, and sustainable agriculture and food security,
among others, which will steer the economy back on a high growth path.
These expenditure directions are anchored on the 8-Point Socioeconomic Agenda of the
Administration and are consistent with the priorities identified in the PDP 2023-2028. Such
priorities are part of the National Government’s (NG) commitment to the achievement of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
’ Adopted and approved through Executive Order (EO) No. 14, s. 2023 (Approving and Adopting the Philippine
Development Plan for the Period 2023-2028) dated January 27, 2023
1

### Page 3

2.1 Infrastructure Development
2.1.1. The Administration’s Build, Better, More program assures the continuity of the
country’s infrastructure development agenda, but is likewise mindful of the
NG’s fiscal consolidation strategy2.
2.1.1.1 Implementing agencies must first prioritize the completion of
ongoing infrastructure programs/activities/ projects (PAPs), given
the already substantial provision for infrastructure outlays under the
FYs 2022 and 2023 General Appropriations Act (GAA)3, coupled with
the two-year validity of infrastructure appropriations4.
2.1.1.2 New infrastructure PAPs shall be limited to shovel-ready
proposals aligned with the investment priorities identified in
Section 2.1.2 and part of existing programming documents5, and
masterplans and roadmaps6.
2.1.1.3 in addition, priority will be afforded to infrastructure PAPs that
have undergone program convergence7 efforts and inter-agency
collaborations.
2.1.1.4 Lastly, implementing agencies shall anticipate and pursue the early
resolution of recurring operational issues and bottlenecks
impeding project implementation to guarantee timely movement
and completion of infrastructure PAPs.
2.1.2 Investment Priorities
Transportation and logistics networks shall be improved through intermodal8
transport facilities and last mile connectivity9, including active transport
infrastructure. Meanwhile. universal access to safe, affordable, and sustainable
water supply and sanitation (WSS) shall be addressed through enhanced
collaboration with local government units (LGUs), particularly on the
harmonization of water and land use plans at the national and local levels.
In order to bring down the cost of electricity, the completion of the reforms under
the Electric Power Industry Reform Act (EPIRA) and the fast-tracking of the full
implementation of the Retail Competition and Open Access (RCOA) and the
Green Energy Option Program shall be prioritized. This will be complemented
by the development of alternative and renewable energy industries, including
those for natural gas and electric vehicle manufacturing. Finally, energy
2 As contained in the Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) adopted by both chambers of Congress through
Concurrent Resolution No. 4 dated September 19, 2022.
3 The amounts of P1.18 trillion and Pl.33 trillion have been allocated under the FYs 2022 and 2023 GAA,
respectively.
4 Pursuant to Section 68 and 70 of FYs 2022 and 2023 GAA, respectively (i.e,, FY 2022 GAA infrastructure capital
outlays [CO] is valid until December 31, 2023; FY 2023 infrastructure CO is valid until December 31, 2024).
5 in particular, the Public Investment Program (PIP) and the Three-Year Rolling Infrastructure Program (TRIP).
6 Such as the National Transport Policy (NTP). Philippine Water Supply and Sanitation Master Plan (PWSSMP),
National Irrigation Master Plan (NIMP), and the National Waster Security Road Map (NWSRM), Philippine Health
Facility Development Plan (PHFDP) 2020-2040, and the SUCs Land Use Development and Infrastructure Plan
(LUDIP), among others.
7 Such as the Program Convergence Budgeting (PCB) of the Agricultural Development Program, Export
Development Program, Tourism Development Program, and Risk Resiliency Program.
8 "Intermodal" refers to movement of passengers or freight from one transport mode to another, taking place at a
single terminal specifically designed for such purpose, Source: Section 4.28, Rule 1, Implementing Rules and
Regulations of NEDA Board Resolution No. 5 (s. 2017) Adopting the National Transport Policy.
9 Last mile transportation refers to any service that moves passengers from a hub of mass transportation, such as
air, boat, bus. or train. to destinations, such as a home or an office (Raghunathan. Bergman, et. al, 2018). Source:
https://ois.aaai.orq/index.php/ICAPS/article/view/13917

### Page 4

security shall also be pursued through demand-side management guided by
the tenets of the Energy Efficiency and Conservation (EEC) Act.
2.2 Human Capital Development
In the 2020 Human Capital Project by the World Bank, the Philippines scored 0.52 on
the Human Capital Indexlo. This denotes that a child born in the Philippines prior to the
pandemic will be 52.0 percent as productive when he or she grows up and has enjoyed
complete education and full health. Given that the pandemic had posed threats to the
gains in the education and health system, the NG will provide continuous support in
prioritizing reforms and investments in health and nutrition, education, and income-
earning ability to bring back the country on the right track in accelerating human capital
development.
2.2.1 Health
The NG will continue to promote reforms in nutrition and health consistent with
health sector reforms such as the Universal Health Care (UHC) Act11 and the
First 1,000 Days Law12. Support will also be provided to strengthen the
implementation of the Mental Health Act13 to address the rising mental health
cases among Filipino youth. Likewise, support will be provided to help manage
the endemic phase of COVID-19 through an improved healthcare system
supported by intensive health promotion. This will include enhancing national
and local capacities for health system management, resilience to public health
emergencies, and promotion of healthy lifestyles through improved health
literacy.
To address the inequitable distribution of national investments in health
specifically in infrastructure and human resources, the government will support
the establishment of regional specialty centers and the development of an
interoperable health information system to facilitate the implementation of digital
health solutions and human resources for health management.
2.2.2 Education
The COVID-19 pandemic greatly affected the delivery of education that resulted
in a shift towards distance learning modalities contributing to changes in the
learning landscape of flexible learning. As the education sector resumes face-
to-face classes, the NG shall strengthen its efforts to improve the quality of
education as well as address the medium- and long-term impacts of learning
losses due to prolonged school closures at the height of the pandemic. This is
in recognition that these learning losses may exacerbate the already looming
learning crises in the country, and are expected to result in lost productivity over
the long term if not addressed. Meanwhile, a recent study by the World Bank
estimates the learning poverty rate in the Philippines at 90.9 percent14, indicating
that nine out of ten 10-year-old Filipino children are unable to read and
understand a simple text. In addition, the results of international large-scale
10 World Bank Human Capital Country Brief – Philippines. October 2022.
11 RA No. 11223 (An Act Instituting Universal Health Care for All Filipinos, Prescribing Reforms in the Health Care
System, and Appropriating Funds Therefor)
12 RA No. 11148 (An Act Scaling Up the National and Local Health and Nutrition Programs through a Strengthened
Integrated Strategy for Maternal, Neonatal, Child Health and Nutrition in the First One Thousand Days [1 ,000] Days
of Life, Appropriating Funds Therefor and for Other Purposes)
13 RA No. 11036 (An Act Establishing a National Mental Health Policy for the Purpose of Enhancing the Delivery
of Integrated Mental Health Services, Promoting and Protecting the Rights of Persons Utilizing Psychosocial Health
Services, Appropriating Funds Therefor and Other Purposes)
14 WoHd Bank. The State of Global LearnIng Poverty.' 2022 Update (June 2022). Source:
https://thedocs.woddbank.on/en/doc/e52f55322528903b27f1 b7e61238e4 6-0200022022/oriqinal/Learninq-
1
poverty-report-2022-06-21-final-V7-0-conferenceEdition.pdf. The estimated learning poverty rate of 90.9 percent
corresponds to the June 2022 data based on the Southeast Asia Primary Learning Metrics (SEA-PLM) Assessment

### Page 5

assessments (ILSAs), such as Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA) and Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
(TIMSS)t showed serious challenges in the education sector as the country
ranks the lowest overall among all countries assessed15
Lastly, the NG will continue to implement a two-pronged strategy that will focus
both on programs for learners and capacity building for educators. These
interventions include the implementation of the Basic Education Learning
Continuity Plan (BE-LCP), the development of catch-up education programs,
the implementation of innovative approaches to offset/address learning losses,
and the implementation of the Excellence in Teacher Education Act16. In
addition, the NG will ensure that policy interventions such as streamlining the K
to 12 Curriculum into the Most Essential Learning Competencies as well as
designing the Technical-Vocational Education and Training (TVET) programs
are aligned with the demands of the labor market that responds to the
requirements for the world of work and the Fourth Industrial Revolution (41R).
2.2.3 Social Protection
As part of the NG’s strategy to improve the targeting of eligible beneficiaries and
delivery of social protection services, implementing agencies are encouraged to
maximize the utilization of the Philippine Identification System (PhilSys) as part
of the country’s digital transformation journey. This is consistent with the efforts
to strengthen digitization services and facilities in the delivery of social protection
assistance through automating verification and business processes and the use
of digital wallets and other innovative financial platforms. Moreover, the
employment of digital payment methods would improve the impact of the social
protection programs while reducing distribution/transaction costs for the
implementing agencies and promoting financial inclusion for its beneficiaries.
To alleviate poverty, the NG also supports the establishment of a standard menu
of anticipatory and shock-responsive social protection programs to address
human-induced disasters and natural calamities, as such efforts can reduce
shocks to household incomes and casualties due to disasters/calamities.
2.2.4 Labor and Employment
The COVID-19 pandemic has reversed the gains of the Philippines’ labor market
during the last decade. Based on the latest employment indicators from the
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA)17, the unemployment rate in January this
year was reported at 4.8 percent, translating to 2.37 million unemployed
Filipinos. This is lower compared to the unemployment rate for the same month
in 2022 at 6.4 percent accounting for approximately 3.0 million unemployed
Filipinos.
While there are signs of labor market recovery, the sector is still beset with the
following: concerns on the quality of jobs as the proportion of vulnerable
15 in the 2018 PISA. the Philippines ranked 76tF' out of 76 countries in Reading. 75a' out of 76 countries in Math,
and 76th out of 77 countries in Science. Meanwhile, in the TIMSS assessment, the Philippines also ranked the
lowest among the 58 countries in both Math and Science. Source: PDP 202&2028
16 RA No. 11713 (An Act Further Strengthening Teacher Education in the Philippines by Enhancing the Teacher
Education Council, Establishing a Scholarship Program for Students in the Teacher Education Program,
Institutionalizing the National Educators' Academy of the Philippines, and AppropHating Funds Therefor. Amending
for the Purpose Republic Act No. 7784, Entitled "An Act to Strengthen Teacher EducatIon in the Philippines by
Establishing Centers of Excellence, Creating a Teacher Education Council for the Purpose, Appropriating Funds
Therefore, and for Other Purposes- also known as the Excellence in Teacher Education Act)
17 Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), Press Release on Unemployment Rate in January 2023. March 9, 2023.

### Page 6

employment18 to total employment remain high19; skills mismatch despite the
convergence of labor demand and supply structures; disruption in employment
through the compounded effects of automation and climate change that render
certain jobs and roles obsolete; and, long-term scarring in the labor market with
the possibility that the pandemic could weaken future labor market prospects for
the youth workforce.
To address these challenges, the NG shall be on top of strengthening the
upskilling and reskilling the labor force through implementing measures that
support continuing education, digital learning, and training as well as the
promotion of lifelong learning processes in anticipation of skills needed in priority
sectors responsive to the demands of the 41R.
2.3 Food Security
In response to the global food crisis due to, among others, supply chain disruptions,
climate risks, and higher energy and fertilizer prices in, the government shall ensure
that food is available, affordable, and accessible for consumers. As such, priority shall
be afforded towards the strengthening of local supply chains by enhancing agriculture
productivity and expanding the access of farmers and fisherfolk to markets. The high
production costs shall be addressed through improved access to the following
production requirements:
a. Land. Land distribution shall be made efficient through the adoption of digital
technologies that will hasten the titling of collectively-owned land. Meanwhile, land
use, specifically for forest and ancestral lands, must be sustainable and fair,
ensuring also the protection of the indigenous peoples’ (IP) rights, knowledge, and
practices.
b. Irrigation. Climate-proofing shall be the foremost focus for irrigation projects.
Existing irrigation and drainage systems shall undergo climate retrofitting while new
ones must adopt and incorporate climate-smart technologies.
C. Energy and Fertilizer. Minimizing the impact of high fertilizer prices shall require
exploiting local farm and non-farm wastes and biological materials to serve as
alternative energy and fertilizer sources.
The NG must also strengthen its partnerships with LGUs to thoroughly expand the
access of small farmers and fisherfolk to markets and enterprises. In particular. the NG
shall support LGUs through capacity-building activities and steering functions to
identify and provide value-addition opportunities, harness the full potential of their local
food systems, and set-up necessary policies and investments for the development of
a blue economy:21. The NG and LGUs shall also collaborate to encourage the
consolidation and clustering of farms and fisheries to attain economies of scale and
optimize their existing resources not only for production but up to the entry of their
goods to the market.
18 i,e,, self-employed and unpaid family workers
19 in the assessment of the labor sector in the PDP 2023-2028, it was cited that the proportion of vulnerable
employment to total employment is 34.1 percent in 2022.
20 Recognizing and tackling a global food crisis. World Bank. (2023, January 5).
Source: https://www.worldbank.orq/en/news/feature/2023/01/05/recoqnizinq-and-tacklinq-aqlobal-food-crisis
21 Blue economy pertaIns to a practical ocean-based economic model using green infrastructure and technologies,
innovative financing mechanisms and proactive institutional arrangements for meeting the twin goals of protecting
our oceans and coasts and enhancing its potential contribution to sustainable development, including improving
human well-being, and reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities (Source: PDP 2023-2028),

### Page 7

2.4 Enterprise Development
According to the 2021 List of Establishments of the PSA22, micro, small, and medium
enterprises (MSMEs) make up 99.6 percent of the country’s business enterprises and
generate 64.7 percent of total employment. This sector also contributes 25.0 percent
if the nation's total export earnings, with approximately 60.0 percent of exporters
belonging to the MSME category23
While the digital transformation of MSMEs will facilitate their participation in global
value chains241 the September 2020 Baseline Survey on Digitalization of MSME of the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) revealed that only 6.0 percent of MSMEs
employ advanced digital tools, with 23.0 percent reporting no digitalization at all25
Hence, pushing for the digitalization (e.g., conduct of digital literacy programs) of
MSMEs and accelerating their adoption of e-commerce (e.g., awareness and
advocacy campaigns on its benefits) shall be key priorities.
Further, in order to maximize the institutionalization of major foreign direct investment
(FDI) reforms in 202226, the NG shall enhance investment promotion and information
dissemination programs to attract more FDls to the Philippines (e.g., coordinated
communications campaign in collaboration with the private sector and social partners,
strong internal campaign especially among LGUs).
2.5 Research and Development (R&D), and Innovation
The Philippine Innovation Act established the Innovation Fund which aims to
strengthen entrepreneurship and enterprises engaged in developing solutions
benefitting the poorest of the poor directly or indirectly27. The National Innovation
Council (NIC)28 shall accelerate the implementation of the Philippine Innovation Act
through the efficient utilization of the Innovation Fund – which entails the formulation
of the National Innovation Agenda and Strategy Document (NIASD)29.
The NG shall provide further support through diffusion (i.e., extension and promotion)
and commercialization of both publicly and privately funded science, technology, and
innovation (STI) products. This includes the provision for public research institutions
and State Universities and Colleges (SUCs) with platforms to pitch their R&D products
and to successfully commercialize their technologies.
2.6 Digital Transformation of the Government
The push for the digital transformation of the government must be geared towards
more efficient service delivery, increased transparency in government processes, and
22 2021 MSME Statistics. Department of Trade and Industry. Source: https://www.dti.gov.ph/resources/msme-
statistics/
23 MSMEs are able to contribute in exports through subcontracting arrangement with large firms, or as suppliers to
exporting companies.
24 Digitalization provides MSMEs with access to new markets, customers, and financing options that were
previously available. MSMEs can also use their small size to their advantage to surpass big businesses via
digitalization, with many big businesses having a harder journey to transition online than the more nimble
entrepreneurs just starting out.
25 Baseline Survey on Digitalization of MSME (September 2020). Department of Trade and Industry. Source:
https://ecommerce.dti.qov.ph/madali/baseline survey.html
26 Passage of the Corporate Recovery and Tax Incentives for Enterprises (CREATE) Act, the amendments to the
Foreign Investment Act, the Retail Trade Liberalization Act, and the Public Service Act
27 Section 21 of RA No. 11293 (Philippine Innovation Act)
28 The NIC is established pursuant to Section 6 of RA No. 1 1293. 1t is mandated to develop the country's innovation
goals, priorities. and long-term national strategy
29 Section 16 of RA No 1 1293 mandates the NIC to develop the NIASD that shall establish the country's vision and
long-term goals for innovation consistent with country’s long-term vision, and with global and regional
commitments.

### Page 8

fewer opportunities for corruption. Hence, the NG shall expedite the implementation of
its e-governance projects that will establish an integrated. interconnected, and
interoperable information, resource-sharing, and communications network to deliver
public services.
The digitalization efforts must also prioritize the building up of better data systems that
will aid in the creation and implementation of programs (e.g., more targeted social
protection programs). Digital filing and payment systems shall also be adopted into the
government processes and transactions in order to heighten regulatory compliance.
This shall be supported and complemented by the strong promotion of digital literacy
and financial education, as well as the intensification of cybersecurity protection.
2.7 Accelerate Climate Action and Strengthen Disaster Resilience
The 2022 Philippines Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR)30 highlighted
that if no action is taken, climate change will pose substantial economic and human
costs, affecting the poorest households the most. The CCDR estimates that economic
damages in the country could reach up to 7.6 percent of GDP by 2030 and 13.6 percent
of GDP by 2040. Nonetheless, economic losses could be reduced by two-thirds if
appropriate adaptation actions will be enforced.
Key adaptation measures in agriculture and climate-proofing of infrastructure must be
prioritized. It is important to protect vulnerable infrastructure from typhoons to avoid a
large proportion of climate-related damages. Meanwhile, for agriculture, resilience
must be improved through diversification of production and the adoption of improved
practices such as the Alternate Wetting and Drying (AWD)31 method.
The enhancement of ecosystem resilience to climate change shall also be prioritized.
Support must be provided to accelerate the rehabilitation of degraded ecosystems and
strengthen the management and sustainable use of natural resources using integrated
and ecosystem-based:32 approaches and nature-based solutions (e.g., storm buffers
and carbon sink).
2.8 Strategic Directions on Transition to Full Devolution
In line with the transition to implement full devolution of certain functions and services
to the LGUs and aligned with the expenditure management framework of the FY 2024
Budget33, proposed agency programs shall be consistent with oversight functions of
NG focused on formulating development strategies and assisting and supervising
LGUs instead of providing direct basic service delivery.
The NG shall continue to prioritize strategic regional needs while harmonizing regional
plans with national priorities in order to enhance linkages and to achieve equitable
regional investment opportunities and growth. Agencies shall include in their budget
proposals the funding requirements for the implementation of regional programs
responsive to the needs of the poorest, disadvantaged, and lagging LGUs.
The alignment of national, regional, and local objectives shall be prioritized through
close coordination between National Government Agencies (NGAs) and LGUs.
Regional plans shall be harmonized with national priorities through vertical and
3D The CCDR is a collaborative effort of the World Bank, International Finance Corporation, and Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency which comprehensively analyzed how climate change will affect the country's ability
to meet its development goals and pursue green. resilient, and inclusive development, Source:
https://www.woddbank.orq/en/countrWhilippines/publication/philippines-country-climateand-development-report
31 A water-saving technology that farmers can apply to reduce their irrigation water consumption in rice fields
without decreasing its yield. Source: PDP 2023-2028.
32 Also known as an ecosystem approach. the integrated management of land, water, and living resources that
promotes conservation and sustainable use in an equitable way. Source: PDP 2023-2028
33 Section 2.0 of NBM No. 145 – National Budget Can for FY 2024

### Page 9

horizontal coordination of NGAs and Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations
(GOCCs) with LGUs. Alignment of plans across all levels of government incentivizes
the LGUs to consider complementing national projects with smaller-scale projects
within their political boundaries, maximizing the positive benefits of the investment
made by the NG.
As frontline service providers, the LGUs shall be treated as equal development
partners in the development agenda of the country. Capacity and competency-
enhancing interventions shall be provided to help equip the LGUs for their full
assumption of basic service delivery. Determination of the capacities that need to be
strengthened shall be done to map out the competency-enhancing interventions that
must be undertaken for the achievement of local performance goals.
3.0 FORMULATING THE TIER 2 PROPOSALS
3.1 Composition of Tier 2 Proposals
The agency proposals under Tier 2 for FY 2024 shall be categorized as follows,
including their multi-year requirements for FYs 2025-2026:
3.1.1 High priority new and expanded PAPs:
3.1.1.1 Implementation-ready
3.1.1.2 Infrastructure PAPs included in the Public Investment Program (PIP)
2023-2028 and Three-Year Rolling Infrastructure Program (TRIP)
FYs 2024-2026, and/or Investment Coordination Committee (ICC)
approval by March 31, 2023.
3.1.1.3 Corresponding requirements of these Tier 2 proposals for FYs 2025-
2026 to be considered for medium-term planning and programming.
3.1.2 Scaled-up activities in terms of policy change not previously approved such
as scope, beneficiaries, design or implementation schedule.
3.1.3 Essential operations, maintenance, asset replacement, and minor capital cost,
including funding required for technical assistance programs to LGUs and
those under the Organizational Effectiveness Proposals (OEPs) of agencies
as a result of the devolution of functions to LGUs.
A list of Tier 2 inclusions by allotment class are detailed in Annex A of NBM No. 145
– National Budget Call for FY 2024.
The departments/agencies are reminded to tightly prioritize their proposals given
limited fiscal space.
3.2 Formulating Tier 2 Proposals
3.2.1 The department/agency’s budget officers, as well as the Budget and
Management Bureaus (BMBs) and Regional Offices (ROs). shall undertake
the necessary analysis/evaluation to reflect the budgetary requirements of
their Tier 2 proposals.

### Page 10

3.2.2 The Tier 2 proposals shall:
Be limited to the PAPs or goods and services that are to be delivered and paid
within the year, in line with the transitioning to cash budgeting.
Accordingly, the proposed budget for FY 2024 shall only pertain to the
cash requirements to be fully disbursed within FY 2024. The proposal
shall also include estimates for the out-years (FY 2025-2026), as may be
applicable.
3.2.3 To optimize allocation of the limited fiscal space, Tier 2 proposals shall be
evaluated taking into consideration the following:
3.2.3.1 Available fiscal space set by the DBCC
3.2.3.2 Implementation Readiness
The PAPs to be included in the budget must be implementation-ready,
and to be delivered and executed within the year. Proposals must
include clear, comprehensive, and complete submission of relevant
supporting documents such as:
a. Feasibility Studies;
b. Detailed Engineering Designs;
C. Annual Procurement Plans:
d Relocation Action Plans;
e. Right of Way Acquisitions;
f. Agency Operational Plans;
g. Agency Sector Roadmaps;
h. Network Plans:
1. Inter-agency Clearances and Permits; and,
Proofs of coordination with LGU implementers.
J.
The proposal may also include other necessary information like
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plans and risk management plans
which indicate efforts to ensure that the proposed PAPs are ready for
implementation or execution.
If preparatory works are still required prior to actual execution,
particularly for the new programs and projects, the necessary funding
requirement shall only cover the first phase of implementation or
which is planned to be disbursed within the year.
3.2.3.3 Agency Absorptive Capacity
The agency absorptive capacity as indicated by the recent budget
utilization rates, represent the likelihood that the new allocation can
be utilized by the agency. A low absorptive capacity reflects that the
agency is unlikety to utilize additional funds.
3.2.3.4 Consistency with the Priorities in the BPF
Proposals that address the identified gaps through the strategies
indicated in this BPF will be prioritized for funding.
3.2.3.5 Indicative Annual Procurement Plan (APP)
An indicative APP shall be prepared alongside the budget proposal to
enable the agency's conduct of the early Procurement process once
the FY 2024 NEP is submitted to Congress in July 2023.

### Page 11

The Budget Preparation (BP) Forms 202 and 203 issued in NBM No.
145, as well as BP Forms 709 and 710 for GOCCs issued in
Corporate Budget Memorandum (CBM) No. 45, and other relevant
supporting documents shall be the basis for the evaluation. Hence,
the agencies shall ensure clear, comprehensive, and complete
submissions of these forms.
3.2.4 Agencies shall reflect the order of prioritization of their budget proposals by
straight ranking (i.e., only one PAP per rank and without sub ranking).
3.2.5 Tier 2 proposals shall be submitted to DBM through the Online Submission of
Budget Proposals (OSBP) System on or before April 30, 2023.
3.3 Planning and Budgeting Linkages
3.3.1 The NG shall continue to prioritize strategic regional needs while harmonizing
regional plans with national priorities in order to enhance linkages to achieve
equitable regional investment opportunities and growth. In particular, the NG’s
FY 2024 budget shall provide funds for agencies’ regional programs which are
responsive to the needs of the poorest, disadvantaged, and lagging LGUs.
Coordination between Agency Central Offices (ACOs) with their respective
Agency Regional Offices (AROs) for the medium-term shall be undertaken,
subject to the following:
a. The department priorities in the different regions;
b. The assessment of implementation-readiness of the priority PAPs in the
regions; and
C. The consideration of the likely resource constraints for the regional
planning and budgeting as a result of the “Mandanas Ruling
In turn, AROs shall craft annuall regional plans and budgets anchored to these
priorities and criteria. coordinating their efforts with the Regional Development
Councils (RDCs) to ensure convergence of regional programs.
3.3.2 Agency programs to be implemented by LGUs shall have been coordinated
with the targeted LGUs as to the resource availabilities and should be
responsive to local and regional needs.
3.3.3 The ACOs through their AROs and SUCs shall finalize their agency budget
proposals and should provide timely feedback to the RDCs on the items that
were and were not included in the submitted proposals.
Hence, the Department Secretary/Head of Agency shall be held accountable
in ensuring that its budget proposals have undergone the proper RDC review
process.
3.4 Reviewing Entities
Agency proposals shall undergo the review process/es of the following entities before
they are recommended for funding:
3.4.1 The NEDA Board Investment Coordination Committee (ICC) for review of the
Project proposals with total project costs of at least P2.5 billion, except as
otherwise provided by law, such as, but not limited to projects:
10

### Page 12

a. Covered by the Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) law and its IRR34;
b Requiring National Government borrowing or guarantee35;
C. Requiring Presidential or NEDA Board approvals based on existing laws,
rules, and regulations; and,
d. Proposed for funding with the Chinese Government, regardless of amount.
3.4.2 The NEDA Board Committee on Infrastructure (INFRACOM) for review of all
infrastructure projects which shall undergo the TRIP process. This is to ensure
responsiveness to the outputs and outcomes of the PDP 2023-2028 and
implementation readiness when being proposed for budget inclusion.
3.4.3 The Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT) for
review of the department/agency’s Information Systems Strategic Plan (ISSP)
in support of ICT-related proposals.
3.4.4 Other endorsing entity for review of budget proposals involving specific
concerns as detailed in Section 5.2 and 5.4 of the NBM No. 145 – National
Budget Call for FY 2024.
Only proposals that pass the respective review process/es shall be considered for
funding under the FY 2024 Budget.
4.0 For immediate compliance.
i F. PANGANDAM AN
Secretary
st Section 2.9 of the revised 2022 IRR of the BOT Law
35 Covered by RA No, 4860, as amended. otherwise known as the Foreign Borrowings Act, and RA No. 8182, as
amended, otherwise known as the Official Development Assistance Act
11

### Page 13

FY 2024.2026 TIER I CEIUIGS
n====
F= 2024 2026
MOOE MOOE FlnEx CO TOTAL PS MODE FInE & CO roTAL
®rrm
C:ngf S S es e e • . n \a a t t e e a 1 E h l e e ct P o h r & d p T p H ne x s ,n { d COttGRESS tg la 6 a : 5 s$ 7 8 6 4 7 8 5 7 2 4 1M3 9T 6 6 4 8j : e 6 6 9 8 - 2 :6 09 T / T 6 T 0 2M4 8 3 g3 2 5 0 m 9 5 0 2 6 3 t X O 6 7 5 5 7 6 8 4 7 5 7 4 ] 1 D 4 # : H 2 6 2 s 5 r 6 8 2 6 } 3 1 5 T 2 c 0 B 9 - 7 fs 6 a 0 5 321 689 lme 6 2 5 56 7R 4 8 5 ;; 4 66 4 3 3 9 7 3 m 3 T 2 T 2 8 R 91 ,
C H o a m lle n kw of o n R ep o r n e + A + p n p b a t n b t 8 m s en ts 6 4 33 0 0 5 2 5 9 8 9 3 10 4 24 9 6 1 . 3 2 1 8 5 5 t6 8 5 9 7 6 6 8 6 6 1 ' 4 1 6 4 3 0 3 5 0 5 7 8 9 3 9 la 5 4 0 3 0 2 2 9 3 2 3 3 16 9 7 0 6 5 3 8 2 1 2 6 2 6 4 3 0 3 5 0 5 2 8 9 3 9 IO 5 6 0 2 9 5 4 1 4 2 9 9 t6 9 SS 1 S 5 0 4 3 2 2 8
House of RorosenUt,ts Elutard ToEiand 177 858 63 :39 241 098 177 859 &4 391 242 250 177 859 65 578 343 437
---
Onc T e h o e f t P h r e W P d r e e r b lt d fS + O nl f f ( I O Ce P s t 1 1 2 2& 8 4 4 7 7 4 4 5 5 7 7 7 7 4 4 8 6 , . 9 9 7 7 7 7 9 9 . 0 03 3 9 t 7 7 2 :2 2 1 1 2 :8 & 4 4 , 7 '4 4 5 5 d 6 , 0 0 2 2 2 2 1 1 6 6 3 5 ; !!: 7:5 ma 4
OtH O e n o e f th o e f V M €e e P V r c 8 & td P €n r t e sId ( e C n )V t P) 1 1 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 2 2 2 2 1 1 4 4 2 2 ,3 3 0 a 4 4 === 2 2 2 2 8 8 6 6 7 7 8 8 6 8 1 t4 4 4 4, 4 4 8 8 2 2 2 2 , 1 t7 7 9 9 2 2 0 0 1 1 BUn :'::: ::3 H4 'T m !' 33l: 8:2
Dep O an tk m • m t o t o t f h A • o S r& e I c n re t& R y eform ICAR , 5 S 3 3 5 5 9 9 1 1 4 4 5 5 3 3 8 8 0 0 5 5 6 6 1 1 6 6 9 9 t 1 & 6 4 4 7 7 6 6 1 t S S 2 2 9 9 0 0 8 8 6 6 8 8 3 3 I 1 t 1 S 5 3 3 2 2 5 5 mo mg M1
Dep O a B tm ce e n o t f o th f e A g S m e u a h 8 w te 8 y ( OA) T6 V108- 6m29 ! 59 56+ 733 T32M 980 163 8 08 653 525 m6.0849 M500 iIi:iii i T 23 m 17 7 S 089 8m4 20m6,986 iT:ii?: TSSE 11n7.S09-4 t: ai :I 9::;:'?i4
A B g u r r K ea u u R o u f r d F C a r h e B 4q n s P u o d R ) A C q o a u a rt t e c d Resources 9 4 34 3 7 5 6 0 9 7 S 3 4 0 0 1 8 2 6 3 5 0 2 1 7 1 5 0 0 8 0 0 0 5 0 1 2 7 8 3 3 4 4 4 3 0 7 5 2 3 9 4 34 3 . 7 3 6 0 9 7 S 4 4 7 1 5 6 8 0 6 1 3 2 1 7 6 5 4 0 8 0 8 0 5 0 1 2 8 8 0 3 5 3 9 I 4 C 8 8 3 9 4 1 3 4 s 7 a 6 7 9 561 4 1 2 3 4 5 2 0 6 2 1 7 3 3 8 0 1 C 8 C 1 D 2 2 7 . B 92 IS 8 8 0 5 0 7 7
F P P N P P N h h h e 8 h 8 + + 4 e r i r p t + p p o o £ p p p p n n z m t ' a d d n 8 n o e e e M F n I F C C C d s e O h o e v H e y n • W P D b n t h e n e a + I & r n t # o 8 z p f d o f R l t u d o c r C S e B r 8 P e A s t o r o n e g y A a s t a n e u F D r S c r m c H e u t h h w o # R n % 1 v b lr d 8 p e e e r m s a D l m n D e d t v n d d F A o o n p u h p m 8 e r 0 n r M n w e t t y n b t n sw d M it ech#legIon 2 I 1 1 t 6 4 2 I 7 8 3 t Q 7 S 7 9 4 4 7 1 3 8 5 1 B 0 3 9 9 7 4 T 9 5 4 6 4 9 1 1 2 5 2 2 7 5 4 0 4 0 8 7 6 1 9 2 1 8 . . . . , 2 4 4 3 7 9 4 3 6 3 0 1 0 5 2 1 0 1 3 9 7 B 4C0 1 3 2 4 6 3 3 S 8 4 1 2 8 6 S 3 6 3 2 3 6 8 3 8 3 9 2 6 1 S 8 5 0 4 9 6 7 7 3 4 7 4 \ 1 2 1 1 C 6 7 8 2 3 4 } 0 7 3 0 2 5 6 . 9 9 0 8 3 ' T 4 9 6 8 9 4 e 6 t 8 5 6 5 l 2 2 1 1 3 1 5 0 9 6 3 6 6 9 5 0 0 8 8 1 4 0 9 0 8 6 1 1 5 6 2 8 4 2 1 8 3 9 0 6 t 8 400 3 4 5 3 1 1 3 4 2 1 0 6 9 6 3 5 4 6 9 9 1 9 4 1 9 9 4 1 6 2 4 2 8 2 5 6 9 8 0 5 7 6 2 I 1 ' ' 3 4 6 0 2 7 8 2 S 6 0 0 7 3 9 0 9 8 H 7 1 9 6 8 9 8 4 S 1 8 5 6 1 6 1 1 2 3 2 1 6 6 4 0 7 9 4 0 2 1 8 5 5 3 5 9 4 7 4 5 8 2 4 3 8 5 7 7 8 4 0 4 0 3 8 11 200 1 3 2 4 5 2 3 4 6 0 2 0 9 7 6 7 2 9 7 9 3 , 0 4 4 8 7 9 6 2 9 2 8 9 1 5 9 6 1 0 5 9 9
Dep O G an N o m \ e 'e • n m t o m f o t f e h B n e u t S P d r e g o e c c t r u e a r x e n y d R M en a t n P a e g S e k m y • B n o t B tD & B T M e ) chr\Kd Support OHke 9 93 8 5 3 6 2 6 D 3 5 O 5 0 5 S 8 8 2 3 0 4 0 5 8 9 9 7 4 2 2 5 7 n= I 1 , 7 B 1 3 t 1 6 9 . 5 2 8 9 8 77 5 2 9 9 5 8 3 0 2 3 , 9 6 3 9 5 3 5 0 5 . 4 4 3 1 2 9 1 8 . 7 7 6 2 1 0 3 7 6 jn :';i 6 2 3 3 361 : :: 5 3 2 ': 3 g 5 o 5 :i 1 d 1 : 2 : 0 3 4 :::3 6 i 3 M 55 3 9
Dep O N N N # a a a n tm O I B c la o e a e n n n n o d d d t f o A h B C f c e O o E a o U d d S k n e u C D u m c I a l w a y le t l w d o o t o n f C p t S h D m p + t o c p e r t E n t e S t n a B ' ) s T 3 + tl d evts on 5 :, 6 i? 2 7 1 2 4 1 9 3 0 7 4 9 1 2 4 6 1 3 7 8 6 : 4 4 6 3 7 t lai S 7 2 IS i 6 7 g 7 0 s ; 4 4 a ; 7 7 t ::g;899B T60F7 6B I 7 3 0 1 1 4 4 3T 7 4 8 1 i3 3 6 8 T6 6 0 8 ig ii 2 4 I ? S 7 4 i 6 3 1 ; 8 6 4 1 i 9 7 :8;g 7 2 t ; S 8 8 8 0 e 1 7 1 2 8 g 4 8 0 T18R 68a0m 8a9t i689 5 ta 7 3 2 s 4 2 5 8 8 I 1 S 6 1 4 S 4 7 7 a ii 2 4 1 ? 4 9 7 i 6 1 3 i 8 4 6 i 9 1 7 n1909m 9 7 2 1 9 6 9 9 9 . 0 6 5 0 77 6 3 4 5 4 4 8 T IB 8 3 6 B 80 T 8 i 0 3 9 T S K O 9 I 7 4 1 7 7 3 0 i 0 ; 3 5 7 i i 1 2 1 4 i? 6 2 8 3 0 3 8 1 T
N E P 8 h & t + O b p ' p n C n d h e l U O H u t0 8 U 3 h U c ! m S e c v o h e f O n o n e lI d O P t a t I h t n t e b t I o A :D n R e n t s er: Ccyr=l 2 1 3 1 5 7 : 8 5 le 9 2 D 2 3 2 2 6 6 2 0 3 S 7 3 0 a 7 p 4 1 4 3 9 7 7 T 8 5 B a 3 9 w 4 4 23 1 3 7 4 5 8 3 1 9 2 $ 2 3 0 2 i 6 8 3 S 3 3 : T 3 3 ta 2 3 4 1 3 9 3 8 8 : 3 9 2 1 0 5 5 0 2 3 1 1 5 7 4 8 5 lg 9 2 a 2 3 2 2 6 7 4 4 0 3 2 8 1 2 5 0 0 7 4 t 3 0 0 8 0 8 0 F 0 0 4 4 2 7 3
State UnNer9tle8 end Colleen ISUCs) 84 007 585 3S,202 562 n= t 809 230 IOI 019 377 64 007 sas 35 398 068 pUn 1 705 096 IOI 110749 64 007 585 35 662.318 1 683 807 IOI 353 711+
E M ? P P R T U D t M N P U A A B H KM B C b N Q h b a h a l p + n o n u , a e a a u e w 8 u r b x a o I e i b a I > l n N g c U n n n n d g w D r v I n u O r e a R y r & h d h k # M W g g g f a p e g n n a s 8 f M r T S e o n a t u y • y + L e a t ' R 0 m S S S \ c a o e d V b n n a a u e S S S y t l u A S t n k c t t t v : a P M S S u z a y n e r S t t t r h l N S o o P m t n a B a o e t c o t g P o t e a a t t n e f a l t t n t r a q o a • e V r o m e U t e e a o c t c t S N U e 6 y r t d b M P h e t l n o C U U U w e m o t o • o n U C t e 4 e h a U c N s d n # U S t N o n r €e g = n 4 4 d C O o h I e n R H P S v c t h l # 4 n N 8 F p : e l n R u e o e h o o e o t n U U a N n w d l v 6 > # g c e m e l r i o S g d c g R t e e p n U H y r y H t n S e o e f 9 \ e t C U H r N g y V t n S v n M > % y t t s o P 3 e n N S U # r y N g e v a n f 9 e h v , 3 t t I y a t • o S e & n a P } t 8 h e m r 8 l r s s I p s N : I l e r 1 7 e A o z ! V f w b p r h S r \ e M P C r B t g e n d y e I y h t e C © e e t P a n . t + S l l t c o e e u l a h p t h l m g t I e J , a p I e I e n D g I F t T e e c e a O r r s o U C ’ b O s S n l o l n n v a I+ e o t g a r I s e g :e O g y VIa Technctogr 15 1 1 t 2 1 : 1 6 4 8 8 0 2 7 7 5 2 t 6 3 2 2 8 0 5 IS a 7 1 3 8 5 5 8 8 5 5 6 6 4 1 6 0 8 0 6 3 8 3 0 s S S 8 4 6 6 8 4 7 7 3 4 4 5 2 2 1 7 2 1 1 3 0 2 4 :a 5 5 7 0 5 1 9 8 5 1 4 5 7 0 9 2 8 8 9 0 6 3 3 C 9 2 6 9 1 0 4 1 8 9 4 8 4 8 0 7 1 5 3 8 7 2 t 9 s 7 0 1 7 8 1 4 4 5 6 7 4 7 + 3 9 6 7 2 2 4 3 ' : 6 2 2 9 4 4 4 2 2 5 3 3 : 1 t 1 1 I 1 1 l 4 o O 0 7 6 9 8 3 3 2 7 2 1 8 T 8 7 1 1 7 9 7 8 5 3 3 O g a 3 0 8 5 O 5 3 0 4 0 6 2 7 7 6 8 6 9 4 1 . . 1 5 5 4 6 4 6 0 0 5 5 1 0 8 1 4 s a 3 2 1 a 3 2 9 8 4 8 9 5 3 0 a 7 3 9 3 8 5 6 7 0 1 1 8 7 3 5 1 l l 5 9 9 9 0 2 s 5 g s 9 6 2 7 1 1 3 7 1 9 3 0 5 8 2 2 2 t l I I t 2 2 l t 2 I I I I 3 2 1 a a C O S S S S S S S 5 4 4 S S S 3 S 0 0 0 0 2 9 e Q 0 0 0 0 D 0 2 o 5 0 0 7 a g a 0 o 0 0 0 a 5 s D O G c 6 0 0 0 0 e o 0 0 0 0 a 0 o 0 0 0 O c e 0 a D D O o 0 0 0 0 0 a o 0 0 0 0 o 0 a 0 0 0 o O 0 2 2 t 1 1 2 1 t 4 2 9 4 6 8 4 3 9 2 2 2 g 4 4 3 3 1 7 3 2 4 6 3 3 3 5 3 2 9 0 7 9 6 3 9 1 3 a 5 3 8 2 5 7 1 3 7 2 5 5 - 3 8 1 1 6 6 0 5 7 0 9 3 s 8 7 9 8 6 0 7 3 4 . 3 0 7 B e 0 1 9 1 1 8 5 0 2 U 3 S 3 5 9 8 9 3 9 7 4 1 3 1 e S s 9 5 2 7 2 7 2 2 1 5 6 6 3 8 3 0 8 d 1 G S 0 3 s 6 6 0 8 7 6 1 6 2 5 4 5 2 8 5 1 1 a t 1 1 1 1 5 2 7 6 4 8 8 0 2 7 7 5 2 6 2 2 0 t 1 1 3 8 5 r S 4 5 0 8 5 5 0 8 6 8 3 g 4 1 0 6 3 7 3 6 1 0 0 8 S B 6 9 7 7 3 5 4 2 7 1 8 s 4 4 2 2 4 2 1 1 0 6 3 . . . 4 3 4 5 5 7 0 5 9 4 7 0 , 6 9 5 9 l 1 S 2 8 8 9 0 3 a 2 0 8 1 1 9 2 9 1 4 4 0 7 8 6 8 9 9 4 1 3 3 7 & 1 1 1 4 6 7 0 7 8 4 7 9 6 4 5 4 I 6 1 7 7 2 2 3 3 6 1 2 2 9 4 4 5 2 2 s 1 t 1 tt 1 3 3 t 1 O S a 7 3 4 7 a k 6 2 2 6 7 9 2 7 9 6 1 8 / 1 1 tO O / 2 3 1 8 5 3 4 4 9 5 8 6 0 8 5 8 i 5 3 9 8 : 6 0 5 4 6 4 8 1 4 1 3 7 8 9 u 5 1 7t 7 0 1 6 1 8 3 7 3 4 2 5 0 7 3 2 4 8 8 6 2 5 4 5 a 8 7 6 2 9 t 3 6 8 6 9 5 6 9 8 4 9 5 7 3 0 4 7 7 9 v 6 5 6 8 4 I t 1 1 2 I I 2 2 I I l 2 I 2 2 U I t I 1 S a S S S S a S S 5 5 0 S S S 5 5 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 a e 0 0 c 0 0 C 0 0 0 0 0 U t a c 0 0 0 3 0 0 x 0 0 c c 0 a e 0 O U 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 e 0 0 0 0 0 0 : e o 0 0 0 a a o U 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 O 0 0 0 0 0 0 22 : 1 1 t 1 1 4 : 3 4 6 8 3 4 3 : 3 2 7 2 2 9 4 4 1 ) 2 4 8 3 3 6 9 9 3 & 7 3 6 3 2 3 8 6 5 3 0 9 t S 2 3 7 1 1 4 8 2 3 4 7 7 B 5 0 4 7 8 6 9 3 6 5 8 S 9 9 4 2 6 . . . , 0 . . 2 2 0 4 3 9 O 1 o 6 5 0 4 2 2 7 6 8 6 8 B 3 1 2 5 1 6 9 7 3 5 4 a 9 1 3 6 1 2 1 3 9 9 1 I 5 0 6 I D 6 3 3 0 9 2 9 3 7 1 Z ; 9 8 0 9 0 3 2 8 2 0 9 7 IS 1 1 1 3 6 4 8 8 0 I : 1 2 7 7 5 2 t 6 } 2 2 8 0 3 1 S 1 5 8 5 5 8 6 6 7 T 3 6 6 4 6 3 0 t 6 3 8 3 0 9 O 9 2 6 7 7 3 5 4 2 + 4 4 3 2 1 7 8 6 1 1 3 0 2 5 4 4 3 5 5 7 0 S 9 9 4 s 7 0 I 5 1 9 2 8 8 9 3 6 3 1 O 2 0 6 a 9 2 9 4 1 4 0 7 t 8 9 8 9 4 1 5 8 3 7 8 6 1 1 1 I 7 0 7 4 4 7 9 6 t 5 6 4 1 7 7 2 4 : 3 6 1 2 2 9 4 4 6 2 2 5 q 2 1 1 1 t 3 3 1 t 7 8 4 4 F I 7 6 3 2 6 6 9 3 0 7 0 7 1 1 8 0 t 9 5 t C 1 8 6 4 T 4 5 3 7 8 4 2 0 6 7 0 2 7 8 2 2 2 3 2 5 1 3 7 2 9 2 7 5 9 4 9 1 3 s 3 1 I 5 1 9 t 3 9 O 7 0 4 5 I 8 3 0 8 t 7 9 8 S e 5 1 2 5 6 0 2 6 0 I 3 0 5 7 4 O 3 2 8 5 9 3 8 B 8 4 8 3 3 3 4 7 7 8 I I 2 2 I 1 t 1 2 I l 1 2 1 I 1 I 1 2 I S S $ 5 5 a D S S S O S 5 0 5 S 0 5 0 0 0 5 5 0 , 0 0 0 , . . 0 0 0 0 0 a 0 0 0 a a 0 0 0 a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 a 0 0 D 0 0 0 0 0 0 a 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 O 0 0 a 0 0 0 a 0 0 0 a 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 . 6 4 2 9 4 8 3 S 3 9 2 3 1 7 2 2 9 S 3 4 2 4 6 3 3 9 3 9 3 3 6 3 7 3 6 7 2 O 6 5 8 3 0 7 1 1 4 7 1 4 7 6 1 9 5 4 4 4 t 8 4 8 4 9 7 7 8 4 3 2 5 7 O 0 . . . . . 9 0 8 6 8 9 1 6 5 3 7 8 5 7 1 1 4 1 4 3 9 7 2 1 ' 9 0 6 9 5 8 0 3 8 6 1 8 1 2 7 5 7 2 4 0 5 5 3 3 4 3 3 8 1 1 9 6 3 4 2 3 8 3 4 1 0 1 5 9 9 2 1 1 1 0
A B B u a u r t l a o a a r c a n n S P A t e a g n e n n C c s u u c h # l• e , r S 9 d e t S a o t t • f a T V te e rw c G h n a n l b o ty l o o r gy 1 4 1 3 4 tO 3 : 8 9 4 3 3 8 1 5 4 32 8 9 3 6 8 4 4 4 5 4 4 9 4 0 1 2 IT 0 4 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 7 2 0 8 S 7 1 ' 2 6 9 9 7 a 0 9 4 1 4 1 1 3 4 0 1 2 8 9 4 3 1 6 1 5 4 3 8 9 2 6 9 4 8 5 2 6 4 6 4 1 5 3 1 IS 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 7 2 0 9 5 7 6 6 6 4 7 9 9 0 5 9 5 1 4 1 1 3 4 0 3 2 8 9 4 3 3 6 1 5 4 3 1 8 2 0 6 7 0 . 0 & 9 8 8 4 7 7 7 1 3 1 5 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 ' 2 /9 0 5 0 8 7 . 4 S 7 3 7 0 1 8 2
B C D N P P P T T 8 C L S U a a r a a & e u n u w t a a e r g u t N 8 u I l n b t g S r a K t u n 8 v e o a V p t l I n H a r e a r g d u : d e n + a a A n e a g r E S S R e L n n n s S g a c t t S y u a t a a r O R L t Z n t M S o £ t t a a e e u a o O S f a u t t t e Z a U U U R e e m V t n l r O B u a n c a U S P n n # o r t h n r d U w W U o e a n W \ n a u S M l e l A w n n v t M S r n t U U 9 t g N a e t u y a y V n r L H t y s M t r e ' g c \ h n v 4 S & n s u o U e H N t y t e a ' h t m m 8 y n s W V J S t N r e U e r y 3 B c d W a U A n I r e U c # U n S n a n e N a c d ' N n a e e e a ' e B a t m s y n e U o y d r y n T h e e c n h o nology 7 7 3 5 2 1 3 2 4 5 6 4 3 6 7 3 7 9 9 2 9 2 7 3 1 2 6 IS 5 5 3 0 4 3 9 5 6 5 0 5 5 9 7 0 3 9 5 7 0 0 9 8 9 l 1 e 2 0 9 2 6 9 6 2 5 8 4 8 21 s 9 3 3 7 6 9 2 5 8 6 6 7 1 1 7 6 4 2 2 . 3 t 1 1 1 3 t 2 0 0 6 9 6 2 2 1 0 3 8 3 9 0 7 1 8 4 1 7 4 3 3 8 1 8 4 7 0 . . . . 9 0 7 4 8 8 t 1 8 9 6 5 4 4 e 1 8 9 5 5 5 9 5 8 0 a 4 : 1 1 7 3 3 l 2 0 6 3 9 6 4 5 I Z 2 I ; 2 / I 2 l ? . T b I I I O S S t ? S q S 0 0 4 I J 6 0 0 O O a t 0 Q 1 a O ( D 1 ' t ) D J h O 0 0 0 o D O U O l r a i O U 0 O 0 0 0 a l D O O O l 1 t t I 1 1 5 0 0 0 4 2 5 4 8 / 7 / 5 0 0 8 4 6 6 4 4 2 8 2 2 2 8 7 0 8 9 2 5 9 t 8 0 9 4 8 3 6 4 4 6 1 2 1 8 0 0 4 7 2 5 8 t 3 2 3 4 1 5 0 : 0 3 1 e 3 1 : : 3 6 5 6 9 ; 2 3 6 o 8 7 7 3 5 2 1 3 2 4 3 6 4 ) 6 I 7 9 7 3 9 9 2 2 6 1 2 7 1 S 3 9 5 5 0 4 1 5 5 5 5 6 0 0 . 9 0 9 7 3 9 3 I t 7 a 9 6 9 O 2 ? 2 8 2 8 6 9 6 s 0 4 3 1 5 7 S B ? 9 3 6 9 2 6 6 1 1 7 3 6 4 0 2 2 2 1 I 1 1 3 : I a 6 1 6 7 9 2 0 P 8 3 9 1 ? s 5 3 1 5 0 4 1 B 9 6 9 4 a 6 7 O a D 9 S 8 a 2 1 t 1 & 8 9 t l l 3 i 3 S a J 2 l l t r 1 1 d G 6 7 6 d . 7 1 ' 2 2 3 I 1 2 I 2 t 2 2 1 1 I S S S S 0 3 0 5 0 0 0 0 5 5 7 5 0 a 2 0 0 0 D 0 0 0 a 0 0 4 0 a 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 a O 0C 0 5 0 a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 a C 1 I 1 r 1 1 . 5 a 0 0 4 2 5 4 8 7 7 5 8 6 8 9 7 7 4 3 3 7 2 2 3 5 2 9 1 0 4 4 9 9 4 2 6 9 1 0 0 7 . , 6 0 8 4 7 1 3 5 1 t 6 5 9 1 8 4 0 7 S 7 0 2 8 4 9 7 4 2 9 0 3 7 9 8 8 7 6 8 7 9 3 t 7 7 3 5 2 1 3 2 4 5 6 4 3 6 3 7 3 : 9 9 2 2 1 9 2 7 ' 6 0 3 S 5 5 0 4 3 5 5 9 5 6 5 9 7 0 3 9 5 7 0 0 9 6 9 1 1 2 2 8 9 8 0 6 2 5 8 4 8 2 0 1 7 9 3 3 6 9 2 5 8 6 6 7 5 t 1 7 3 6 4 I 1 1 1 4 a 2 2 2 1 I 6 t 6 3 S 3 9 3 0 7 9 2 0 0 6 9 2 0 5 0 7 2 8 9 3 2 7 3 6 : 2 H 6 4 1 1 3 4 1 3 2 8 7 2 5 3 0 9 7 8 5 i 6 0 : 8 T 7 6 8 7 . 0 4 1 1 1 : \ ' 1 3 2 2 2 I t 1 1 ! 2 I I 1 S S S S 0 9 5 0 0 S S 0 5 8 C 4 0 0 2 0 0 a 0 O a 0 0 4 c S C 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 5 D i D T 0 0 D 0 0 0 0 a 0 0 0 O t t t 1 1 1 5 0 0 0 4 2 5 4 8 6 7 7 5 8 6 0 3 3 3 7 3 2 3 9 3 7 : 9 0 0 r 1 0 5 . 8 3 2 3 7 2 0 1 . 0 4 0 8 4 6 7 7 : 4 0 : ) ) 0 4 8 2 6 8 6 4 5 6 9 : 0 3 6 4 4 / 9 6 1 6 5 8 1 9 8 /

### Page 14

FY 2024.2026 TIER 1 CEILINGS
M O I e r, c d d o + ra n U St a H ; h< U I n w v o er S g td by 8 CtBege 2 3 2 6 9 5 5 69 6 t 4 1 2 5 1 2 7 2 63 /b 4 2 2 7 0 S 6 O 50 O 4 5 0 3 2 0 3 9 4 7 0 5 1 2 3 3 3 9 1 7 8 8 7 6 3 3 9 2 7 0 . 7 4 5 77
P Ro d m aw bk a ir n l S S t t a a t t e e U U n n r r w ,e r a v r 8 N 4 29 5 t 0 5 133: 3 1 9 4 3 9 I t B S; IS D 91 O 5 O 4 8 5 5 8 8 6 s ) l 4 a 4 2 5 9 0 1 1 5 3 52 3 ls 9 a 4 5 a3 70 8 4 5 5 9 1 7 5 0 8 1 3
Weston PhAporte Unr„euty 287 441 97 747 24 100 AT: ::: 199 547 SCI 988
8#:aI Stag Coleq8 of Apple<1 ScIences aId Tectrncioqy tIS OSI 91 toe t 0 aoo 236 159 135.051 91 31a 10 000 236 161 13S 051 91 847 10 000 236 890
Carrwtnn Norte State CoINe 280 989 iSg 908 tS 000 aSS 897 280 989 160 302 IS 000 4S6 2g I 280 989 161 647 IS,OGa 457 636
Caeumts Sur Po}/tect\nc CAges 204 685 260 102 tS 000 479 967 204 &BS 262 038 tS 000 481 703 204 665 264 039 15 000 483 704
C88nauu es State LJnNHslty 404 908 363 027 15 000 582 933 404 906 164 710 IS 000 584 616 al 906 1&6B13 IS,00: 586 719
C€nBd Beat State UnNWrtty ol AcrKuRure 454 030 486 590 20 000 960 620 434 030 487 417 20 000 961 447 451 030 489 695 20 003 963 725
D P r • . r E tld m o B S o I B d e E U w n n m on w . ty St. Memond Stae Cole8e ofA9rwhute and TochnlgaBy 1 3 3 1 6 0 8 72 ? 1 6 l 1 t ) D 2 . 6 0 3 4 3 0 I I S S D aa O a O 4 2 5 6 8 2 . 5 4 6 5 9 9 13 3 1 4 0. 8 ra 2 t 6 I 1 f 3 t 3 1 7 9 2 7 8 I I S S 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 4 6 5 3 9 0 44 : 23 1 3 3 1 6 0 8 7 2 2 6 1 1 1 1 3 2 5 0 r4 7 0 3 I 1 S 5 0 O D DD O 2 46 6 0 3 . 8 8 6 9 1 9
Sonogon St8e Urwer+q 298 387 189 145 tS 000 502 732 208 387 IB9 674 IS 000 503 061 298 387 191 032 IS ODD 304,419
Ann SiZe Unhws4y 44 1 039 152.074 IS 000 BOB 113 441 039 352 384 IS COO BOB 423 44t 039 153 448 IS,Cao 6a9 487
Cub: Sate Unntsfy 724 399 328 639 IS 000 1 068 038 724 399 328 637 IS 000 1 068 036 724 399 329 900 IS ODD 1 069 299
C H a A r d b• o M H e la m do o n M d e S m t o a n t d C S d t + a B te e U ) nwwB ttormerty Carlos C 380 454 247 3t2 23 500 631 266 360 454 247 567 IS 000 623.a2 t 360 454 249 003 r 5.Ooo 624 457
Gulmvn State Colege 107 731 ISI 573 lsgoe 276 304 107 731 152 313 IS 000 275 044 teT 731 t 52 878 15.aoa 275 609
k>b Stat Unlwn4v ot Same and Technology 319 252 t60 204 10 000 489 456 319 252 leo 172 tO 000 489 424 319 252 160 988 10,000 490 238
Cenvd PhIppM&s Stage UnNtfWfy 192 &42 300 304 10 C)(X) 503 146 192 842 301 a43 la COO 503 885 192 842 302 030 r 0003 504 BOt
Northern lola State UnNw8ty lformHty Northern lb&> PobtHIIne State Colege) 416 219 248 390 10 000 672 6G9 4 t 6 219 246 266 10 Gaa 672 485 4162t9 247 IB2 10 000 673 381
North en NHr09 State C:oleg+ of SCIence nd TuI\nobBy 136 075 126 1 10 la 000 272 IBS 136 075 125 377 10 000 271 452 136 075 126 023 la 000 272 098
UnNenty oIAnD9r8 310 937 274.806 tO 000 595 743 3t0 937 275 271 tO GOO 596.208 3tO 937 276 221 ta aaa 597.158
Ike> SWrIce end TechnobgyU nNer9ty SSI 583 398 868 is,aaa 963 451 SSI 503 398 138 IS caa 964.721 SSI 583 401 325 15.aao 967 708
W Bo e n st d V k u In y d n S S ta t t a e t U e u n t t h vv w v a ty y 1 4 4 8 4 8 0 1 36 7 S 6 4 3 8 0 3 6 7 4 8 8 9 0 2 IS 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 t 9 7 8 6 t 1 .9 8 6 4 5 5 1 4 4 8 4 8 0 3 t7 6 6 5 4 3 8 0 7 8 0 1 3 4 1 8 2 IS 0 c G e OO a r 9 7 9 6 5 1 2 5 0 1 7 3 1 4 4 8 4 8 0 1 3 7 6 6 5 4 3 9 0 2 7 5 2 7 7 1 0 2 1 0 5 0 0 0 a 0 o 2. 7 0 6 00 2 . 6 74 3 7 5
C C N e e e b B 9 u u r w N T e a o c r r e m h n n d a o y b o g S m c ta d a t + U e U nI n \ v e a S & q ty 3 9 5 6 5 5 5 8 1 5 9 7 7 6 4 1 1 7 1 2 4 1 2 2 1 1 2 5 6 6 1 2 0 7 1 4 2 2 2 IS 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 5 9 0 0 8 2 6 8 1 5 9 6 7 3 8 3 3 3 9 55 8 5 1 5 8 . 7 5 9 6 7 4 t t 7 1 4 1 2 2 t 2 S 1 7 6 0 9 4 2 t7 2 2 2 t I S S 0 C 0 a O 0 o O 0 a 2 4 2 8 0 8 9 S 0 6 . 6 I g O B 8 g 3 S 3 s S s 6 S a 5 I 5 9 7 4 7 6 7 1 t t r 2 4 3 2 1 1 3 6 7 8 5 8 2 0 2 5 7 1 2 1 0 5 5 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 4 2 9 1 3 9 0 0 7 7 2 3 9 6 0 6 8 9
8wya StHe Cokg• 90 935 47 638 10 000 148 573 90 935 45 241 tO 000 146.176 90 935 45 473 10 003 146 ItO
E E a 3 s 6 t l e e r m n H S u & tu m v S S H u e b U U n r & w e e t m re y 4 s 4 la 9 8 6 8 8 3 8 2 3 0 0 7 2 3 8 5 4 3 3 I I S S a 0 o 0 a 0 6 8 7 2 2 8 2 S 3 31 8 4 S 4 tO 9. 8 6 8 8 3 8 2 3 0 0 8 3 1 3 2 4 0 9 I I S S 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 7 2 3 9 . . 0 0 0 3 3 7 4 sl 4 a 9 8 60 8 8 3 2 3 0 0 9 4 2 1 3 2 7 0 1 IS 5 0 aD 00 a 6 8 7 2 4 9 1 8 4 0 0 8
L B e a H n e N P o ro rm w d rn U n S N ta H te t f U y nI.aBV 2 2 3 5 5 0 1 00 8 1 5 1 1 1 7 4 1 3 B 8 S 1 S I t S S 0 O 0 C 0 C 4 3 3 64 6 4 H 9 C 6 2 2 3 3 5 0 1 e 8 a 6 t I I t T S 2 3 7 8 5 8 0 I 1 S 5 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 4 6 3 5 7 5 7 7 5 4 1 2 2 3 5 5 0 1 00 8 1 5 1 1 1 7 6 3 s 6 a 89 s 1 IS 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 4 6 3 6 8 6 6 9 7 1 0
Ncnl\wea Samar State UnnrW 203 836 77 492 10 aaa 291 323 203 836 77 658 t 0 000 291 494 233 836 78 036 10.000 291 872
Pdompon InseN18 of Technok>Oy 206 279 87 602 10 000 303 881 206 279 88 237 tO 000 304 516 206 279 88 894 1 D 000 305 173
S S a o m ub • e r S m t • L te e U W n S Nr tg ru t W e Un\ ers&r 2 3 7 7 2 5 5 5 6 6 7 9 1 tT 4 I 7 3 7 1 5 0 3 I I S S 0 a C G l O a 4 5 3 6 4 2 8 3 7 5 7 2 2 3 7 7 2 5 5 5 6 9 7 9 1 1 4 7 8 2 4 9 1 3 6 0 I t S S . 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 5 3 6 5 3 , 9 5 8 2 3 9 2 3 7 7 2 5 5 5 6 9 7 9 1 1 7 4 4 9 . 4 91 3 1 ' 1 IS S Q 0 a 0 a 0 4 5 3 6 7 5 4 0 7 3 8 0
L '/ i + n • .b 1 e 8 t s s e S f o tr t e £ b 8 n s f e ,n tr q PR&Fats 3 ;1 6 4 63 3 1 2 4 2 2 3 1 5 3 9 6 41 0 S 3 2 1 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 7 0 9 9 5 3 1 7 3 1 7 7 S T 6 Ia 6 S 32 14 2 2 3 1 5 4 3 3 0 3 3 5 2 : 1 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 7 0 9 9 5 7 & 3S 4 4 9 1 7 6 1 6 4 5 3 1 2 4 2 2 P 1 I 5 3 9T 4 T 6 I 2 S 0 G 00 O 0 O 1 7 1 9 0 6 7 8 2 6 $ 0 9
J H CH++ Sale Colege 203 954 t36 174 IO 000 350 '28 203 954 t 36 7N tO OOO 350 ? ' 8 203 99 t 37 371 10 000 351 325
Jose Rad MtmaIJ St81e UnJfetvN 428 &42 3 a4 240 IS ODD 747 882 428 642 395 06' IS 000 748.703 428 642 305 907 IS 000 749 549
Wettnn Mnd#lao State UrwBr9ty 779 507 21 a 373 IS 000 1 005 080 779 507 208 558 27 600 1 ,O1 3.663 779 507 2t 0.447 IS Qaa 1 004 954
Z Z a e ' N IO + o o + n g g a a P S n ta n t s C ul O a k P ge o} O 1 I 4 M ec a h I n n c e S S ta c te lK U c n e r s # w rI s a o TNFpolcgy 1 IT 7 T 6 6 7 4 0 2 3 IS S S I 1 3 1 7 . 3 t 2 tO 4 0 3 0 0 0 0 2 3 5 3 3 6 7 S S T 6 S 1 1 7 7 6 7 6 7 4 0 2 3 1 S 4 l 9 9 S 6 eT 5 1 IS 0 0 6 0 3 0 0 3 2 3 4 6 4 6 2 0 1 7 4 1 IT 7 : 6 6 7 4 0 2 3 IS 5 O 1 8 gO 89 d I T O S 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 2 3 4 7 4 5 6 3 it 1
B•sIan State Celege 98 135 95 292 S 000 197 427 96335 969'6 5 ceo 198 esT iS 135 9T 559 5 aec) 'SS 694
MSU'Tn+Trm CoINe ot TBrnd3gy nd Ceeane8nOhy 615 032 103671 2S 000 743 073 StS 002 tH 57 : 25 eco +48 673 695002 I053'8 25 GOD 746 320
S T a u b b b + S T ta am t R C e o B le © q n e d Ag£uhad CaIne 1 1 4 5 5 0 4 iS 3 t 9 T 34 S 6 1 8 7 0 9 5 S D 00 O 0 C 2 1 2 9 5 0 5 4 8 3 8 1 t tS 4S O 4 T C S S I 7 }4 5 S 8 3 9 2 3 S 5 c 0 a 0 a 0 2 19 2 0 5 , 6 9 4 3 4 1 1 IS 4 O 5 + 7 C 5' g 7 3 5 5 8 1 7 1 4 2 S 5 g 0 O 0 D 0 2 1 2 9 6 0 2 8 8 6 3 3
BvhOnon State Unv8rbV 428 034 419317 15 000 862 32t 428 004 423 724 IS 000 866 728 4Z8 004 428 263 IS 000 871 267
C C a tn n B bg a u U ln n P a o & ty l e a e g c h Y n n c . v S u t S a t t y e College 6 8 2 2 3 8 3 7 2 6 6 29 3 3 5 6 7 2 8 8 1 20 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 9 2 4 3 1 6 1 5 5 7 4 6 8 2 2 5 8 5 7 2 6 6 2 3 9 6 8 t 1 B 0 S 3 la 5 C 00 O 0 O 8 9 2 4 4 3 0 6 0 2 1 9 6Z 8 S 2 8 5 7 2 6 6 ra 36 1 6 1 0 68 1 2 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 9 2 4 4 6 4 6 7 9 7 4
U C r a w R e n n ,I eY ot Sane• XIa T€hnokigy oI Southern PIl fPD on • Cagayv\ de Oro 408 028 470 302 20 DOO 906 130 408 028 479 314 20 000 o07 342 43 028 480 582 20.009 908 59a
M Un S N U e + a4 g y e n o I h S W c U en te e • o n f T d n h T n €J o \n to o g lo y gy of Southern Ph6f>pnn . Cl•ven• Campus 9 8 5 9 2 5 9 3 6 0 0 4 1 0 2 9 3 .0 4 1 7 9 1 2 2 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 2 8 3 6 3 S 43 49 1 9 8 5 9 2 5 9 3 6 0 0 4 1 1 2 5 4 0 t2 7 3 5 2 2 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 2 8 3 2 4 B 0 O 83 S 95 6 2 9 5 9 3 6 0 0 4 1 2 2 1 4 3 7 1 9 4 1 2 2 3 0 .0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 2 9 3 8 4 . 8 7 4 5 1 4
Nont\em Bukdnon State Cc#ege 4S 493 110164 S 000 160 657 45 493 tII 321 S 000 162 014 45 493 112919 5 000 163412
N D o a r n S e w d ta e e O m n M S n ta d t & e l : a a o k g S e tate Cokge ot Sc trice nd Technok;gy t4 3 t 8 2 38 9 1 4 t ; e 3 D 6 8 3 4 3 6 7 S 5 0 D 0 aG 0 3 z 0 ia 7 1 iB 4 a 0 t4 9 1 8 2 sa 9 i 4 1 1 6 0 0 6 8 2 7 3 4 t S s. C ca O D O 3 20 0 9 7 8 1 1 6 2 8 1 9 4 3 1 2 DO 9 T 4 1 1 t 6 h 1 . 3 / 3 1 2 5 5 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 2 0 1 7 0 6 31 0 3 9
Dayn del Sur State CaleB 96 597 79.436 S 000 181 003 96 S97 78 981 5 Gaa 180.578 96 597 79 305 5.000 180 902
Own dd None Sale CaleB 102 557 taj 868 IS 000 222 425 102.557 104,073 IS OOO 22 1 .630 102.557 104.428 15 000 22t gBS
Dano C>neon Sate Urwnvq le7 752 172 280 IS 000 355 032 167,7S2 173 054 IS 000 355 80 S 167 752 173 850 IS.ODD 356 602
Sou8\em PhlWn es AgtbBuness and MarIno VIa AquaK School of T€hndogy 92 064 61 657 IS 000 168 721 92 064 61 788 15 000 160.832 92 064 62 182 15000 169 246
U c C o n a t N a a e ) r a H a t e O a y o S F f o I d S u e o n u U d t n h n o e w a n e s C n te o lt m + y e t P b g h r + m l o p f a p S H ly c n C am om e > n a d o C T I e ty c h S n t8 c t io e g P y ot)luhn c Co4egel 5 1 1 2 7 7 5 0 4 . 9 1 0 6 0 1 5 3 9 2 1 1 0 2 0 7 2 8 . 9 9 9 9 5 4 3 2 5 2 I 1 O 0 0 G e e c c e o o o 2 7 3 8 0 5 7 6 : 9 0 9 1 8 9 7 4 6 5 1 IT 2 7 4 5 0 9 0 : 6 0 IS 5 3 2 1 1 0 0 2 9 7 4 5 8 3 5 9 7 6 0 4 2 l l a a 0 0 0 0 9 3 3 0 9 0 7 2 3 5 8 0 5 8 8 5 0 3 2 0 7 1 9 7 5 l I r N 2 c 5 9 0 It 6 0 S 5 3 2 l 1 e 1 2 o 1 5 5 & 7 7 8 9 3 6 6 2 l 1 a 0 0 . 0 a 0 D 0 0 D 0 0 7 2 3 5 8 0 7 8 9 5 9 7 8 9 4 2 9 '
SoutI eRa>do State Colege 35 848 25 597 5 ceo 66 535 35 948 2S S14 5.030 66.862 35.948 26 2St 5.000 67 tSS
SuB•rl Kud#a St8e UnNonRy 345 614 207 229 la aea 562 843 345614 208 915 tO 000 564 529 345 614 210 650 tQ 000 566 284
UnTerS4yo i Southern Mndanao 632 378 271 077 20 000 923 453 e12 376 272 469 20 ago 924 845 63: 376 273 902 20 000 926 278
A U A C , d g # n o u a d n t g a a g n a n a P S d o e t e a m S l t S t e o a u n U t r d e n S U N P ta n © o t l s V e M t B C y €1 S o \ t n l r e c g e S o t l a A te o C rc o u le h g Jr e e VIa Tuhnokjoy 3 3 3 3 9 9 0 7 9 4 6 l 2 8 6 a 4 5 1 s 1 4 7 6 2 1 6 9 4 1 8 3 0 6 3 2 1 7 6 0 0 0 0 - 6 6 2 2 I 5 0 S S 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 2 6 8 5 2 8 2 0 0 : 4 4 9 3 6 4 6 :3 5 8 0 1 3 3 9 9 0 3 9 4 6 7 8 2 6 1 4 1 5 0 1 4 7 5 6 1 2 4 7 9 3 S 0 5 8 8 T 1 5 d 5 9 : S 4 1 7 2 I 2 S S S 0 0 a 0 0 0 D 0 0 O 0 0 0 4 0 2 6 8 9 5 2 3 5 1 1 0 0 3 8 0 2 2 0 2 5 8 8 1 3 3 3 9 9 3 3 4 6 7 2 8 6 la 4 1 5 1 s 7 4 6 t 2 8 4 3 9 3 1 8 6 4 S 0 8 5 0 1 90 0 7 3 2 2 1 5 0 5 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 a 0 0 0 4 2 6 1 8 5 : 0 3 3 2 : 5 8 3 5 3 3 2 6 1 5 4 7
N Su O n r g th a E o n d te e n l N o H rte n d S n t • a o te U S rw +d e • r R U tY nN lto e r t m r+ a y N tfo ln S e b r , b II on S S u t n a g te & o C d o e le l a S e u r o S f t T iP e e c h U n n o # jo e g tH y y I l 4 3 0 1 9 2 : 0 4 7 7 0 4 1 0 9 9 7 5 1 2 9 8 8 I 1 S 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 5 3 2 3 8 7 2 7 6 5 8 4 3 0 t 2 9 2 0 4 7 7 0 4 1 1 9 0 8 5 2 6 3 4 0 I I S S 0 0 0 0 0 3 8 5 3 2 4 5 8 3 1 5 1 0 4 3 0 '2 9 2 07 4 0 ’ 4 2 1 e 2 a 0 3 9 3 1 a I 1 S 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 5 3 2 6 7 9 4 3 0 8 9

### Page 15

FY 20244026 TIER I CEIUNGS
2026
MOOE FInE CO TOTAL PS LOOE TOTAL PS IOOE CO
® aN a c r O h O G N > n t a a n S e v e t c e $ a e e m n l n d o o l C f f f r o . m D C e e f n n e N I e t a f v e l S A d t D n o m n s e A n e e f r d n e i e O C d n m t s o v d . e l y & n e e n S s u e p o p t l t o a h r e N t P D r ) eones 14 2 1 4- g 3 3 1 5 a 6 8 0m 4 s 1 2 4 9 6 B 2 6 4 1 2 IS a 6 4 4 6 4 3 1 . , 8 0 4 a 7 6 6 B 0 2 8 0 5 6 S 5 0 0 5 3 2 5 6 1 9 4 2 4 3 9 5 2 5 3 8 = 36 4 I 1 I 0 1 B 3 3 6 8 6 2 1 2 3 9 0 7 0 7 9 24 8 1 1 1 9 5 8 4 1 2 7 4 3 4 2 7 2 7 4 0 3 6 t 2 3 I 4 1 S 6 1 t 6 5 S 4 ? 5 4 9 mI 24 2 3 3 1 5 5 8 'S 0 4 1 2 . C 6 B 2 9 1 2 9 I 4 S ; 4 4 6 m 4 1 0 I 7 I I I 6 I 9 9 I B 5 1 4 4 0 6 3 1 9 8 3 7 4 1 0 6 3 9 _35 4 I t I 0 1 S 2 0 3 3 4 2 iJ 4 2 9 a 4 7 7 S _ 1 1 6 6 6 4 2 1 2 7 4 8 2 0 7 9 6 2 . . 6 5 6 S 8 3 2 5 T 9 6 2 0 O 4 m 2 t ,4 2 3 3 1 5 6 8 lS 0 1 2 : 9 0 6 8 2 4 9 1 2 IS 6 0 4 4 m6 4 1 4 1 1 8 4 4 6 4 0 6 4 4 7 2 4 c 4 2 4 4 6 5 2 la S 7 7 9 P I 1 1 H 1 3 B 3 ,2 V .2 9 W 9 7_ + 7 b-+ 6 1 t = I 6 E 5 t 2 V 8 a 0 9 V X 8 I 9 7 d . 7 I 0 0 9 T l 1 l 5 5 7 • 0 a l 9 0 2
PhB P p h o ip e p V .n e e l# v a e n n s u A s R n A s t t C e ) n th O e f { h P e V A . O P ) roper 1m 397 203 ta 6849 917 3M 847 120 t 3 R 97 U 2 M 03 J.6a8l6m 5a61 3m 083 772 I'?:Z' 184 1 - 7 T 2 i 4 T 3 ; 2 T 2 3G:i ;i3
Arm V P P P e h d e t h \ b { A e F # o p p n o • p p n e r v c n s l e e e s M A A N o e a m I l r v m + r F y e o o ( n r I P c d L N e n a a N 4 n v 1 e d p d A c p e F b / F t e o u F o d r r o c c r C e e c s s e e n s , ) te ) r 1 9 2 3 1 2 1 1 9 7 2 4 6 S 5 3 9 9 4 59 5 4 6 8 a S 3 3 0 4 4 4 4 t4 9 5 5 4 S 1 2 1 8 1 2 S 1 , . 9 3 8 8 1 3 5 1 1 9 1 1 4 3 5 , . 2 S 5 7 tS 5 8 0 1 3 2 7 8 I 3 2 1 6 2 8 9 2 1 8 5 6 9 1 1 3 1 9 7 5 8 1 7 8 2 7 7 8 2 1 4 3 1 3 2 0 5 1 5 4 4 6 0 6 2 3 0 8 2 8 7 9 4 7 7 9 7 2 2 5 4 8 7 1 6 9 0 3 4 1 3 9 2 1 9 2 1 1 7 2 5 6 5 5 3 0 9 5 4 5 4 0 9 8 0 , 3 3 0 5 4 4 4 4 7 9 5 5 4 3 6 1 2 1 1 1 9 2 3 . , 2 4 2 1 1 2 4 2 4 2 0 7 5 4 3 . . 7 9 2 1 0 5 8 2 3 : 7 8 2 9 6 FnFHH ms 5 0 8 8 5 0 2 8 1 7 6 1 -% 4 3 2 0 5 4 3 67 6 9 3 0 2 % . 0 : 5 7 5 4 1 4 9 M 1 2 2 1 7 t . 5 2 5 4 3 5 8 5 9 0 3 0 4 4 4 9 5 4 m 2 1 1 2 3 s 2 9 4 5 0 8 9 1 2 7 8 5 4 5 7 3 2 0 WU II ? 3 97 8 ; 8 2 i . 7 s 2 ; 8 7 i 1 1 2 Il 4 3 3 l 2 0 6 6 + 9 ? 8 0 1 S 9 4 0 3 4 E 3 9 , . 4 7 9 4 3 6 9 8 8 7 3 2 8 6 7
JonI Level C+ned Adm & SonaR 7 690 780 6 274 002 31 151 900 45 116 882 7 709 839 6.310,202 31 158 Q4a 45 169 081 7 593 435 _6 450 487 31157690 45 la1612
t G A e F n P w W d S H S e U ad s q ) u&ten AFP and AFP•WHe Semce SuppOrt Unes 7 690 780 6 274 002 31 151 900 as rr6 692 7 700 83S 6 310 202 31 158 040 45 169 081 7 693 435 6 450 487 31 tS7 690 45 301 612
Dep O #t n m c e e n o t f o t t h P e u S t+ e c c W 'd o e r V kS nd H ghways tOPNH) 7 12 775 747 6 26 008 721 a700R 266M 963 S 739 0St 431 3 12 343 272 2 2 8 6 . U 4 Z 7 ] 6 3 , 8 @ 78 a 647 264 $48 MB m 12.343,272 S 26 953 461 :: :: :: H 67 7 3 H 63 3 t T 0 6 07 F
Depv O A tm d nc v e e n n t c o e f o d B f I S S O C c S e Ie e n n a c c e e e t V e a y n Ia d T T e e c c h h n n o o lo b g g y y ( t n D s O O S tu T t e I 4, 7 7 7 3 7 6 ? 9 r 2 3 7 1 8 9 3 1 2 18 5 , 5 3 2 0 7 9 3 1 4 ,6 0 9 2 5 5 9 4 3 IS 1 O 4 8 0 8 0 0 0 -Ti 3 T 7 T 1 i 1 F 64 F 4'7 7 7 8 £ 2 '; 1 9 1 ; t 5. 3 :6 00 ;' : 2 = 6 1 Bl 450 2:'2 37 :: 6 : 4 :: 72 76 21 1 U 3 ' 05 ; 8 # 66 54 100 m 38 B 1.877
Food VIa NUt8m Rennh hsskIte 128 098 428 794 554 892 128 agB 434 477 562 575 128 098 442 299 570 397
Forest Plants R+uach ud 3nelopm ent hu bIte 156 637 44 053 200 690 IS$ 637 44 847 201 484 155 637 45 654 202 291
Inc}usBld Tuhnobgy DwdoDment huwt8 283 921 t 29 083 40 000 433 006 277 981 131 4a9 40 000 449 390 2TT 981 133 774 40 000 451 755
Mrds brdustry Rne8ch K\d D&ehpmenl Center 228 276 53 168 281 444 228 278 54 126 282 402 223 276 SS IOO 283 370
N N 8 a b to o . n I d d A R c e a n d & e c m t y I o C f o S up C le Ie d n o c l e t & h \ e d P T h e + c p h p no a l n ogy I 3 B 4 2 0 4 2 9 9 l 1 a 0 s 7 , . l 8 a 5 s 7 1 ,400 1 1 2 4 3 1 7 8 5 8 4 6 1 3 6 4 , 0 2 2 4 9 9 l 1 0 0 8 9 0 7 1 9 6 7 1 1 2 4 4 3 2 8 6 2 5 6 1 3 6 4 2 0 4 2 9 9 1 It 0 9 1 9 7 6 7 1 3 t 1 2 4 6 5 .2 .8 1 0 0 2
Ph+)paf A:Nasa fix G8®hyscd and As&oncmcd StaKes AdmnBBatxn 642 354 498 436 I t40 &60 €42 }64 507 469 1 149 833 642 :B4 516 605 1 158 959
P D n e t n pp b F p n rn e e C a o t uHl br A9lcuhrre ARun and N•bId Fiesaurce s Rue#ch and 197 644 299 487 497 13 197 644 t 520 521 197 &la 1 544 333
Ph+ppno COuncIlt el Hodth Research and D8vobpment 45 273 736 550 781 823 45 273 749 808 795 08 1 763 305 808 570
P C h e i v l> tb p o In rn e e C n o t unal for hagaR Energy and Emagng Technology Research nd 70 71 t 772 59] BSI 305 78,TII 786 501 065 212 78 71 1 800 6S8
P P h h i t p p p p m n e e h N S Jc U J \ e ,t v a o R f e V n o & kn c c h b g b y H ute nd SearnOIOgy I : S C S 6 0 7 5 8 4 9 1 1 7 4 7 9 3 3 3 4 6 6 29 080 3 3 7 3 1 6 4 8 7 3 0 4 1 N 6 n 5 O 78 S 8 4 1 tS 8 I 0 5 7 2 2 7 8 3 3 4 5 5 8 5 S 8 '6 1 1 2 6 6 5 6 0 7 5 8 4 3 1 1 8 5 3 4 2 4 8 S 2 9 3 3 4 S 8 ' 3 2 3 4 6 7
P P h h 6 b p p F p I o n e e S T c 8 l i e tl o 8 c 8 F l H u l e o # h : S h c h h o t o y l t u S t y e 3tan 1 4 5 6 7 8 B IO a S g 86 8 9 4. 6 4 9 4 6 6 2 2 8 7 B 35 s 0 a 2 3 1 6 4 : 8 3 g 5 O 3 t 1 4 5 6 7 8 5 1 2 0 5 5 8 6 8 5 5 3 6 5 0 2 6 2 4 7 3 1 S 0 O 3 2 3 IS 5 0 7 0 9 6 7 1 7 1,4 S 6 T 1S la ? s S 9 8 0 6 1 2 7 9 8 1 7 a l03 2 3 1 7 2 ] 3 9 8 1 9 8 :
SCIenceE dtHaoon In8tRute 50 353 7 273.233 7 323 588 50 353 7 404 152 7 454.sas SC.353 7 537 426 7 $87 779
S ?e e c e h n n :e o b a g n y d A T p e M ch c n a o e jo n g y a I n n d f P or rO m n e © )o tO n n In S In tI s tu t t t e utt 5 6 3 3 6 3 8 8 0 9 5 7 4 5 6 0 2 4 7 6 lac:a 1 ta 0 e 0 3 4 0 3 7 8 5 6 1 3 8 3 8 8 0 9 S 78 5 3 6 9 t I 9 10 000 1 1 0 4 9 9 : ;! 9 ! 1 S 6: I 6 3 8 8 0 9 = S = 6 B 77 l 4 I ID 000 1 1 1 5 0 ' 2 1 9 6 1 3
Dep O C # n t a m c o e r e I e a a l t t a f o b f r e S H S $ e c u d W ra W e v # y e # t e tr e o ' r C td tI b D re n n ebpwn: I C>Syd :) } 1 I 0 T 8 s 1 3 f; 8 1 n ; 7 6 iT 4 2 5 9 i:; if 3 i 9 ! ? 92 i 0 4 3 4 ? 8 ? 4 9 n 6 5 T 4 3 : 2 T 0 5 0 7 t T 7 1 iT 2 3 ) 8 5 I 9 0 T 6 2 :£g 3 g 1 i i 6 g 29 T 1 i 8 n 7 T 3 s 5 4 1 0 6 f 6 jT 0 3 s 6 9 - R 45 E 1 2 9 ig 8 5 4 3 n iS ? 7 B 32 : 2 :: 1 :: ii 3 . 1 i 6 ii 29 I:RaT 4 2 4 B 0 1 : 2 - 6 0 3 B 7 0 T 1 3 m 38 P : 9 le 5 t 3 $ 199 59 7 : 3 4 9 0 5 9 3
N Ju & ve O n V Ile Id A J,I u n h ce o ny n d @ W e e n I# Id e C C # O e bnd 3 SS 2 9 3 0 1 1 g 26 6 0 1 3 5 4 5 6 2 t 163 2 11 9 8 3 0 2 3 4 3 7 S 3 S 2 9 2 0 7 1 3 2 6 6 2 5 0 6 3 6 2 0 1 163 2 1 9 1 7 9 9 0 3 9 3 5 3 S 2 S 9 2 0 7 1 3 2 6 6 3 9 8 7 0 8 4 8 1 163 3 1 0 2 2 a 7 2 0 2 5 4
N8band Ant+overt/ Comm49an 54 654 tSS 107 209 TdI 54 584 157 899 212483 !4 584 160 :41 215 325
Nabond Camel on DesaI+VAN=s 26 379 26215 2 287 54 381 24.653 26 687 2 287 53 627 24 653 27 167 2 287 54 107
N Pr • e te ud n e d n C bd o m C r o n rN uo n n es io o n n h fo d r O th e e n tA o b u a s Pe P o o p o le r s g I S tO t 9 2 7 9 7 8 5 8 0 8 2 9 1 2 1 1 3 93 952 1 5 19 4 8 0 4 8 1 5 1 0 8 1 4 0 5 8 . 8 6 9 2 0 5 50 8 0 9 9 6 5 9 8 9 iDa 868 I S 1 S 9 6 8 . 7 3 t 2 2 4 9 ic 4 e 5 6 8 2 9 5 0 4 9 6 1 0 2 3 3 1 8 4 45.088 1.4 1 5 9 1 9 . 9 21 3 6 9
Dep# O In jq f t f r w i a c n r e r l u o r f o o t f s I T e A o d S u r I n n Is n n m ls t 7 e I a O y tX O > T n I m69 3 4 2 6 T 3 4 0 3 5 T1 3i 2 0m 2 4 . 9 2 1 6 1 7 m2542 8T86 I 2 7 S 5 S 3 7 2 9 1 6 6 ii 3 : 2 3 1 0 : 5 i 1 m 1 2 s 62 3 6 3 6 2 7 3 T1 8b5 S 7 S l 2 6 m1 2 0 8 K6H 32 m 6 3 4 0 3 5 n1 1r 2 6f 3 36 3 7 4 4 T7 3 jtl g87 5 m: 6 9 D 9 iO l:
Nabond Pak8 De#ek>pmutC ommtun 66 355 135.556 10 600 212511 68 355 137 996 204 351 66 355 140 480 206 835
PhIOPIne Comms8©\ on SpOrb Scuba Dhlng 4 874 9.702 14 576 4 874 9 875 14 750 4 874 IO 054 14 928
DeF O •n $ m ce e n o t f o b f e T r S U u e r e a t n a d y haiury (DTll 3 2 0 t9 3 S 9 8 0 3 2 7 0 2 2 7 IB 5 S 6 2 54 4 6 8 pan 31 696 S 4 8 38 2 0 : 7 5 8 6 1 6 3 2 O t6 C 8 :8 7 IS 10 t 2 2 2 7 1 9 3 : 0 3 2 5 1 9 a 250 _ 4 5 8 38 0 2 7 . 0 4 6 2 9 2 } 2 a le c I e 1 7 S 10 l 2 2 8 24 3 1 : 7 6 3 7 8 2 9 800 5 4 4 8 1 5 0 0 6 3 8 8 9 2
8 C C o a o z n o d s p # e u r o c n th B y v o e + n C s h t c w rr J d w u w s n t m t ly s 8 A n um tA o u m 8 y tu o © f the Ph+ppnes 4 1 6 9 8 9 1 8 4 t 1 1 9 0 7 0 0 1 2 6 6 2 2 9 4 7 4 7 9 6 3 3 8 0 IO 200 3 7 1 8 2 3 1 2 1 4 6 8 6 0 3 5 3 0 4 r 9 8 6 0 4 8 9 1 8 2 9 3 0 6 6 2 1 2 6 7 8 3 5 5 6 8 8 1 5 6 8 9 8 250 3 1 7 6 3 2 4 1 3 . 7 8 7 S 1 0 4 6 5 4 1 W 6 8 3 0 9 1 8 2 9 3 0 6 6 2 1 6 3 8 4 1 3 . 6 7 0 7 6 6 4 3 7 9 800 3 1 7 7 3 2 2 2 : 3 9 9 9 5 3 4 9 3
D Ph + i b jI g P n n C e e T nt r e a r d o e f T t I h e e r P \m h g + C pI e n n e te s r S 3 T 8 1 9 3 7 3 7 7 3 4 9 5 1 5 54 7 21 496 1 9 3 9 1 6 6 9 2 0 7 5 3 6 8 5 92 6 7 2 7 3 5 3 8 6 9 9 9 0 1 7 3 2 2 6 48 3 3 7 3 3 5 5 5 9 6 2 2 7 7 3 7 4 2 2 6 9 5 7 1 7 3 3 3 8 2 2 2 7 4
Deo& O C r N r tm a e e A n e o t r f o o B n l r a T e u r S e a c e n s c H 7 B 8 o o : r v a U V rd bont DC>Tr) 2 J 1 q 67 i 8 T 43 ; t: : 8 49 : g 10 B 9 7 T 8 8 8 8 8 8 1 '6 6 1 1 3 2 2 5 1 : , 4 ' 8 ': 2 - 1 1 : 9 3 8 4 2 ,I 7 1 l : 0 6 2 : 9 5 3 ’ ' 2 2 2T3 1a 9 36 4 4 5 n8 2 3 0 1 - 3 ! m 4 4 7 9 3 T 1 9 8 9 B 1 3 T 7 I8R88 I 149 694 021 ItaB 3 1 1 4 1 4 5 S 7 t 3 3 2Ht 6m2 9 3 : 8 3 s6 2 9 0 9 B S S O t 4 89 t 3 9 - 7 7 8 - 8 iI 8 I I1T33 t69 760 T16l-4) 6 ta 5 s 2 .9 4 3 1 6 3
P O a P t H h n h i e r l e > E p n f o o a e f t r T I T n r C n d r o u n s a R p q s o r o t y C r r u A t h 2 a y I# 0 t P u d n o n r C l S y o e o cu p r e It r y at#n t9 5 7 1 1 4 2 43 7 4 t 7 6 9 0 4 3 3 4 8 9 8 3 3 4 2 2 1 5 3 1 7 3 2 4 8 6 0 5 0 2 3 6 9 0 5 5 4 6 5 2 a 5 a 5 a 23 9 0 3 4 3 2 9 S 2 1 6 . . 4 6 8 7 4 0 1 8 8 8 3 3 19 5 1 5 2 4 0 3 7 1 6 8 . . 9 2 2 3 2 0 4 4 2 7 7 9 3 4 2 3 2 5 2 1 1 4 6 1 8 7 6 9 9 5 1 5 7 8 9 1 45 000 22 9 3 9 3 9 1 3 1 4 4 3 t 8 8 l a 0 6 7 4 7 8 3 18 5 0 1 0 3 2 3 € 5 1 8 2 3 2 3 0 4 4 0 7 9 7 8 3 4 2 4 3 6 0 I1 2 0 8 1 9 2 5 7 6 7 1 0 8 1 3 45 000 2t 9 3 4 3 9 3 8 0 3 8 8 . 5 3 3 8 1 2 1 7 S 0 9 9
Tel Reg,JbtUy Beard 20 086 14411 9 480 43 gTI 20 071 IZ 060 5 300 39431 20 aTI 14 314 5 300 39 685
Nab O C on o fR d m :8 m E c I o S o f S n n o I e o r n r S b o c u n r n I P a t op e D u y e lB v t e o lo n p 8 m n e d n D t A o u e M lo o p n m ty o I n N t EDA) 3 1 2 5 la 4 0 B 7 3 . 4 0 1 9 7 8 1 2 7 5,9 4 2 3 7 9 3 7 6 , . 8 6 1 6 0 2 9 7 7 an 3 2 6 1 8 1 0 0 9 0 9 1 4 6 5 7 2 2 7 1 3 , 4 0 7 2 3 7 7 6 9 ?: 2 : 4 ? 2. ' 1 1 2 : 9 : : 2 : 8 ; 2 ' , 7 86 : 9 i ms I ; 5 : 2 g 4 9 'T 9 i 8 ; 1. 2 0 4 87 2 1 t 2 :2 9 ' 2 :I 8 ? 7 ' 9 :i 6 T t Ma I ; 5 ; 3 # 0 ! £ 09 9 0
P P P T P h h a u h b + r b I n p p p k p m p C ;+ 4 o o n q e m e v N S S I • n t t a a e a s O a b s P s o s o # t u n n €8 8 d d 9 V 1 A R 9 o U 1 h 8 t 1 , n u n 0 o z t e r c C t H t h y m S : m e e r d r w o e T f t r h a C e n o n P o g h rc t b t H n n a £ a t + n s g u t• Agency 1 1 9 1 6 0 3 1 4 3 8 9 t 1 3 8 1 6 3 4 8 7 7 7 0 8 8 9 4 98 8 4 2S r 7 9 4 2 9 6 o 7 8 1 4 0 4 3 1 3 2 2 tS 709 6 2 8 3 T 8 3 9 g 0 8 6 6 4 6 9 8 7 0 3 7 8 2 \ 3 0 7 1 1 1 8 3 8 8 3 t9 8 4 3 1 . . 0 9 2 8 1 4 6 9 8 2 8 t 7 3 3 4 6 7 4 2 8 1 2 6 6 4 1 6 5 7 5 5 3 3 5 1 3 8 7 5 9 3 6 2 5 8 8 0 7 3 1 9 3 3 0 6 8 6 & S 7 3 3 4 O 2 9 4 8 I t.8 1 & 3 B 6 3 B 9 1 3 0 2 9 3 1 4 9 6 8 2 1 7 8 3 3 4 6 7 4 i 0 1 T 8 8 7 2 0 2 3 4 4 2 2 2 3 3 1 9 3 7 2 6 2 5 0 7 3 8 9 7 8 1 3 0 a 5 2 5 4 7 2 a 6 0 0 5 4 0 0

### Page 16

FY 20244026 TIER I CEIUNGS
M
ONe O B O u n f r n c e e e h I P a t o & t f S h B e – r P o e I a c n r d s e e t n a S y e S a { e e O t n w P x y S e t ) . Propel U 3 1 1 9 3 1 0 5 5 2 4 0 2 4 2 is 0 1 a 3 4 .0 : 2 I 3 t 8 5 7 1 0 4 4 1 0 6 7 4 1 0 8 5 5 0 7 3 7 7 6 3 1 1 1 9 3 1 0 8 5 5 4 2 4 2 0 2 4 2 1 5 1 1 2 1 8 2 9 7 7 : 5 8 1 3 8 U , 1 0 4 4 0 6 2 9 4 5 4 2 1 7 7 : 1 0 a 6 3 is 1 1 : 3 1 8 5 5 4 2 4 2 0 2 rss 485 anUn nPW T 0 4 4 3 ' 6 4 3 7 3 : 0 :D 1 2 4 7 r.:
N N 8 e b w o s n d a n P d n h n f t o x r l m g a O tio fI n c e Buren 1 9 2 8 8 8 4 4 0 0 1 1 3 2 7 9 7 4 2 0 9 9 1 8 2 9 8 4 4 0 0 38 588 1 t 3 2 8 g 4 4 2 a 9 t 9 2 8 9 8 4 4 0 0 13 1 9 2 . 1 9 4 4 2 0
Othe A r n E b x M u a u n t# •y e C La ) l H nd e + n r I ( n a g E C D o s u ) ncd 6 2S2.124 37 ,6 7 1 7 3 . , 4 5 3 4 1 9 286 315 44 1 7 5 7 1 8 43 8 1 8 6,246 633 36, 1 7 43 9 , 3 2 5 4 2 1 57 929 42,44 7 7 9 9 2 1 4 4 t 6 246.693 IS ::':7: 17.617 41'8:9:);;
AnbR•d Tape Auhonty 121 940 93.813 215 753 121 940 95 SOI 217441 121 940 87 220 219 160
CIImB• Chug• Commluon 60 455 SO,789 I1 1 244 60 455 51 707 1 12 s62 63 455 S2 642 113 a97
C Co o m m r m n6 6 a s o o n n o o n n F H 4 Ig p h n e o r E s d C u v c e a + > t c e n n 4 4 9 8 4 8 9 8 0 0 4 29 29 8 8 7 . 8 1 3 4 4 0 t2 965 29 7 t4 9 8 3 g 7 B 3 S 8 4 4 9 8 4 8 96 8 4 0 29 2 4 8 6 3 5 9 6 5 2 3 29 7 9 7 5 8 4 8 4 5 2 7 49 43 t B 90 oa 4 29 2 4 8 7 7 1 6 5 3 3 7 29 7 9 8 6 2 0 H 4 I 3
Comrns6Bon on ae nOfSO LanWaqe 47 540 24.011 71 5SI 47 465 24 444 71 909 4: 465 24 B&t 72 349
D E F G G I n & g l u m e v n g r e D e g r r s y o n e a u \ R m e n s e d l c o g e D p „ A l C m a I r u t a n O g e m u s n r + y r t r + B C C v m s o o 9 s e u r # o m n n a n t c w s f l o 8 o a o 9 r f n 8 t G h 6 a e v P er h n l m pp e n nt e < s >wned ar Conboled CcrDora&cns 2 7 2 7 & 8 8 2 2 4 1 8 4 6 9 7 1 1 7 8 1 1 2 7 6 2 3 2 1 6 8 6 6 2 3 2 1 7 3 . , 3 9 6 1 1 9 7 2 2 7 9 3 7 2 2 5 300 4 5 t t 1 B 3 0 4 6 4 S 3 7 9 6 8 6 0 1 7 3 6 8 3 1 9 0 3 8 2 7 2 7 8 8 6 2 2 1 4 7 4 2 B 9 1 7 9 I s S 1 2 2 6 3 2 t6 6 8 2 6 6 2 8 7 8 4 1 g 2 8 3 4 O 5 9 a 0 5 8 g 4 5 1 I 1 I 5 0 8 S 7 2 4 8 0 6 1 3 0 8 1 4 0 7 0 2 2 5 1 9 2& 7 2 7 B + 6 2 2 l 7 4 2 8 91 7 9 1 t 1 2 2 6 6 3 2 ' '3 6 6 3 7 B 9 3 1 2 3 3 t 2 1 4 6 0 9 tO 6 7 4 4 4 5 2 1 la 5 0 2 9 7 B 8 0 t . 4 0 4 0 t 3 a 5 0 2 9 8 6 0 s
U M h o d v a Ie n a n o a D T e e v le e w lo v p o m n e R nt t a A rw uT t n o d n y Cbssl'catan Boxd 1 4 0 8 7 7 8 8 6 8 0 6 6 4 4 6 3 3 9 9 3 1 tI 7 t 2 4 2 2 3 7 3 t 4 0 6 7 . 7 8 8 2 8 0 6 6 S 4 8 3 0 9 3 3 t 1 7 1 ] 1 s ? g 1 t 3 1 4 0 6 7 8 7 2 8 0 8 6 6 6 4 9 3 8 9 7 3 1 II 7 I 4 . 2 7 1 7 3 5
NaBo N n a d 3 0 C n o d m C m O s rM se \B n S fo o r n C to u r E C ,Ir u e R a v n e d t a h n e d A th r e ts Art>Propa 3M05 7M09 3 7 7 6 3 0 ( .6 9 9 a 4 g MIT eIT t F 08 © 4 M 22 c 0 3818; 1 i;! !!! ;ag; a 1 ii; $: 3 i® D i t B 6 a 17 -j @771t 0M38 T IT o - 8 o 1 T 7 1 g:?!! i ;
N N 8 a 0 lo 0 n n d d H U r x g B to y n c o d f C ll\ o e n P n+ h 8 4 6 p to p n O o H f he PhIljIPInes 1 7 0 7 6 6 49 2 1 4 lt 8 D 9 9 5 1 55 2 7817 2 1 2 6 4 7 9 4 9 0 6 3 i 7 as 7 9 1 7 2 1 7 1 9 1 1 2 S 5 4 3 4 0 78t7 2 1 2 6 6 8 3 6 3 5 2 7 la 7 s 7 9 1 7 2 1 7 1 9 1 3 4 5 1 7 7 0 8 7.817 2 1 2 70 8 . 3 3 0 5 5 8
NrQo N n g d b a C n o d m A r r r c n h 6 N n e n s o o I f t S h e e n P io M r C pp lu e B \ \ n $ 6 $ 9 4 9 1 5 8 0 2 8 2 4 6 2 0 7 2 2 6 1 8 5 1 4 2 1 2 0 2 8 6 5 9 2 8 3 9 5 5 5 O 2 S 7 7 41 8 1 9 t 7 SS 8 6 7 8 6 4 6 6 5 9 2 B 3S gS S 8 2 7 7 3 9 3 0 5 4 1 8 5 0 7 2 2 3 5 0 9
N N 8 a 1 t 0 o n n d d h S b n B u o r e R nc y 8 Co C un oa c d il nan9 AgencY 8 II 2 T 3 2 5 8 3 3 2 4 2 0 5 1 4 3 8 7 4 9 4 1 2 8 6 7 9 0 0 7 6 7 t 2 5 S 39 t 4 s 5 e 3 B 0 t 2 t7 3 2 5 8 3 3 2 4 25 0 7 t O 2 O 3 O 0 40 112 1 2 4 2 1 4 4 3 8 6 7 3 4 8 1 2 1 3 7 2 5 8 3 3 2 4 1 0 9 8 9 2 9 0 4 9 5 1 2 3 3 1 1 7 . . 4 4 9 7 2 7
Ofk• of Bre PrwdenUd Adv&H en Peace Reconc#abon &Id UnIty 210 569 1.696 858 t 807 227 210.569 936 098 1 146 660 210 S89 941 372 t .151.941
Opt£d Media Board 48 570 20 655 69 225 47 066 21 027 68 093 87 tHe 21 406 68 472
P P h f I + + p I I I n n e e D R r u u l g g E n C la o r m ce m m £ m slo t n Agency t 9 4 5 8 1 7 9 8 1 5 3 1 2 1 0 3 3 8 5 t 6 1 2 4 56 250 3 2 1 1 8 t 7 0 5 4 2 7 7 1 g 4 S 8 t 7 7 1 3 5 3 t 2 1 1 4 4 0 9 6 6 0 8 0 3 1 1 6 8 6 9 6 3 8 3 4 3 t 9 4 5 8 1 7 7 1 9 5 3 t 2 t4 2 3 6 7 t3 1 t 8 3 t 1 7 9 8 1 .4 9 3 2 3 4
P P P h t r r + e & p 8 o w d e I e n n e t r S S d p D L a e e c g t e S l d A a C g t o N e m n e c m Y L s u s a o 3 n n Of6ce 1 7 S 0 2 B 8 0 4 8 7 6 4 9 0 0 1 3 1 4 5 3 1 8 4 4 9 7 7 1 6 0 2 6 1 4 2 tO 6 0 O 6 7 2 5 0 2 4 5 6 9 2 1 7 S 0 O 1 8 0 8 4 4 3 6 9 8 0 & t 4 : 4 6 2 4 8 5 1 0 1 0 3 8 0 7 2 IO 0 5 O 8 2 6 9 1 4 7 4 1 8 9 ta 7 S B O 1 0 8 46 4 3 G 9 8 1 1 4 2 3 3 4 7 9 9 2 1 8 8 8 6 3 2 2 1 3 0 0 3 9 1 0 7 7 3 5 4 5 6 3
P P r h & + 8 > d o en n o e d Co Y m na o g e q t m 8 t 0 n n t Co# S ! t m ag ason 4 2 8 6 0 5 6 5 7 2 1 9 4 1 9 9 9 9 2 5 3 2 9 3 9 4 0 6 9 5 8 0 8 5 0 2 4 :6 1 S 0 S 49 T 9 I 5 2 0 0 3 7 9 1 1 4 6 0 9 4 1 7 4 2 3 6 8 3 7 9 4 2 • 6 C 5 6 4 7 9 1 :' 4 2 2 t8 0 T 1 l 3 ' 2 8 4 3 8 1 3 3 6 8 3 2 1
PMh4vp8pt#ne C O h m kK p m #I 4 s b a e t r : t 3 '1 A B Be 3 n v e d y 389 787 1 5 6 0 7 2 0 9 0 4 0 47 sa 7 a 30 ll 0 309 757 iT S : S 3 0 0 0 5 0 4 S 8 O C C ec :9 o 2 les 7 37 1 5 7 0 3 3 0 7 0 2 0 4 S 8 O 3 1 O 3 D 3 D
JOInt L t t + g g d ld8 8 h 8 + v €re e cv £ V x le B ubwD C t O v u d n c C O lt n { t J n tE tA C d v I tWQ Coyne'I 2 2 9 9 4 4 3 3 2 2 7 7 5 5 _ 3 3 2 2 1 1 8 8 _ : 2 0 9 4 :3 3. ! 2 8 8 9 0 n=n } 3 , 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 9 9 4 3 3 3 2 2 8 3 5 5 pPHFn #8
The S J u u p d r c e t m •r e f ( C J o U u D rt I of De Ph+cpoes ana De Lo bYet Courts T33B aBem 251j 1L0 :90 315 2 T j 0 n 59 ;6 :0 ? 8 T 50 ! + .I 3 :P 6 : 2 s .: 7 '’ : ; i :ii ie: 1: iP gP : I; E: 49 814 822 - 1 T 8 0II8T5 2:571 1; 7:liB ; %) 2 {}: : ;5m0 393f 270
P SC r ao e nu s d n g IQ j o e af n nA N bDa p a rea e dn c s tord T'bund 22B 1 B8 4 C1 4 6 : 1 S 5 7 O 4 9 6 9 2 8 1 0 6 3 9 9 0 3 4 9 6 2 3 3 5 1 4 3 2 0 1 3 3 9 6 0 0 : 1 3 t 5 S 6 7 5 2 9 2 6 0 7 5 9 6 2 6 3 2 8 2 1 8 8 4 1 0 4 6 1 : 5 7 5 4 9 0 I 6 D 2 O 1 3 9 S 4 9 0 1 8 7 8 0 3 1 3 1 S 2 5 8 IC 8 6 0 1 2 7 I 5 C 2 2 2 ! 8 2 4 8 8 4 0 1 I 6 1 S 5 7 C 4 9 1 6 02 3 1 4 4 8 e 6 1 2 2 4 6 2 7 3 1 I 5 3 S 1 0 O 8 5 1 8 8 7 0 0 6 1 1
Court of Tax Appeds 427 267 213 263 65 t94 705 7:6 427 267 220 282 647 549 427 297 225 SQ + 652 768
Crd e S N e d rv S Ic 8 e t C w o e m C rrv o s m ee m n s ( s C n S n C . ) Proper t t . 5 5 6 2 4 0 ,5 9 9 7 9 0 4 3 2 8 8 0 , . 7 0 5 1 7 8 == MUn 1t , 9 09 0 3 0 , I 9 S 8 G 8 1 1 5 5 6 2 4 0 S 9 Q 70 g 4 3 3 8 6 6 4 8 7 5 5 9 ;H ?'::; ::: : '::9; i :: 1' 823 f ::/79:
Career E&ewtv8 Serbme8 oad 43 628 48 739 92 368 43 629 49616 93 245 43 629 SO 509 94 t38
Corn C r O n4 m 8 0 0 6 n U o O n r \ A a u n d A It u le d o It AI T12 aM2 823 8 H 5 b 4 a 4 4 5 5 4 : M 12 d 8 % 77 + 37 w 7 li gig i ii Kgi i: T12i i8n89B 1T56 :gig:i gig; ligg:' iII
Com C m or 6 r. 9 n6 0 e n 9 n O n £ o k n c r E o t n ec s b a IC nr ONELECt 3 3 9 9 3 3 4 4 7 7 8 8 4 4 'Q a 3 3 3 3 8 8 7 7 4 4 1 1 N= 1 1 4 4 . 2 2 7 7 3 3 5 S 2 2 5 5 4 4 4 4 8 6 9 9 5 5 1 1 5 5 1 t 2 2 , 8 8 4 42 2 5 56 6 1 1 n= nu . 1 1 7 7 3 3 1 1 2 2 0 a 7 T 6 S 4 4 , , 3 3 6 6 9 9 , 8 8 7 7 2 2 8 8 0 0 6 6 4 4 t9 9 4 4 0 0 :2:3: 8:2
O#c C e ) o B f c e th o e f O De rT b O U m d b 6 J m d n S m IO m M3} I3n t3i1 319 B1 5 r 0 a 4 B 16T8 m230i 0l08 T 4 f 6 86 3 5 1 49BS I3T 1f3f1f ;3T39 T 1 n 4 m 99 8 &IS : 8: :a i :3; iI: 3 1 533 390 4 M 6 ) 64 709
COm C H m v y n m 4 n S n a O s O n R O n lg n h H 5 o U n V m H o p l u \ a m R r3 a rO n n I s V R V ? 9 S c h I t C B lm qR s ) ' IIe'nor d Comws90n 5 5 6 4 17 2 4 7 1 3 9 2 2 7 2 5 3 3 2 1 1 4 0 3 9 9 9 3 1 7 5 4 9 WU =n g O o 3 S ? 1 S 0 ? 7 6 7 3 0 6 f , 5 5 4 1 62 4 7 1 3 7 2 2 9 2 5 7 . 3 3 1 1 3 8 0 3 2 C IS 2 B 9 S 4 == , 8 8 I 9 6 t 2 0 3 3 9 4 9 5 6 0 8 ! 5 6 4 I 2 T 4 , 3 7 1 9 2 2 7 5 2 m 14 s 344 m6 32 t41
Bud N ge a t O ar o y n S d u D oo a o ry a A t u o h G a o R vn y nment Capua>ons tBSGC ! 362 31 S .185 4 2 5 7 6 2 9 3 3 7 1 4 ++ 708,791 _l06.5 2 2 7 8 2 0 3 4 7 1 4 362 315 182 8 20 2 7 1 2 3 2 5 a 8 = 538 691 183 7 i0 0 7 2 3 2 5 2 4 9 362 315 178 I 2 T 1 t 3 6 4 3 4 3 6 495 791 W3
N Na •l e e o n n d d F Im o g o a d b A on u n A o d rr m ty n6raton 3 9 6 0 8 0 2 0 0 0 sa 0 o 0 3 9 6 0 8 0 2 0 0 0 sa 0 o 0 3 9 7 . . 0 C 0 S 0 6 O 1 D 4 D 4 3 9 7 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 1 0 4 0 4 37 9 0 2 0 9 0 8 0 8 0 5 0 8 37 9 0 2 0 9 0 8 . 0 0 0 5 0 8
NaOond Tobacco AdmnlSBa30n 218919 211.585 t 20 000 550 5D4 218.gIg 211.585 120 000 550 304 2 s8919 211 585 r 20.000 550.304
Ph+ppne Coconut Auf\amy 994.396 984 398 1 ,at 0.076 1 010 076 1 026 226 1 026.226
Phipptne Rce Reseacb InBRt4e 689 575 669 575 689.683 689 663 710 353 710,353
Phiplm• FI+lens DenbpmentAunonty 4 893 082 4 09 1 082 3 480,549 3 460 549
N S • u b g o R n d R • £ g J u e k c R b o rk r 8 y e A o d n r w A ' d sb rn a n b r o tV n ann 1 1 0 8 0 2 0 7 O 50 D 0 D t t 0 8 0 2 0 7 0 5 0 0 0 0 1 1 . 8 00 2 0 7 .0 5 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 8 0 2 0 7 0 5 0 0 0 0 1 t 0 0 0 2 0 7 0 5 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 8 0 2 0 7 . . 0 5 0 0 0 0
NaIond Power Corporalon 1 3r6.421 1 316 421 t 318.805 1 3t8 aas 952 127 9S2 127
Power Sector Assets and Lab+beg Mxlaaerent COrpOratIOn 8 000 000 8 000 000 8 000 000 8 000 000 8 000 000 8.000.000
Phipl>me Crop In6urnce Corporat8n 4 500.aaa 4 500 000 4.500 000 4 SCC aaa 4 SOC OOO J 500.Ooo
Ph+BOHn 8 Ta Acal8my 39 799 29 799 30 693 30 893 31 514 31 6t4

### Page 17

FY 2024.2026 TIE
Fa 2024 2025 2026 ==
MacE FlnEx CO TOTAL PS CO TOTAL PS MOOE FkIE
L N P P P P N so u h h a a h h c n + I R i + t l + a g > a p > p p o n p C n I n d . a n H d n e e e • o K H e n u t o C H H h d e & u U n r h e e n s o e k & I g I a M l f n y r t t l g e F h e n C n e m I A d e n f u # P 8 n o W t I t h r T H h c e r t T e o & r r e F n + r d I p C n v W C I n e t l e a e u t d x p s t C i O a C a d r e p a h n X o a t s e > r n t a r t I d t u tt t A a e R n elnathe HeaRn Cae lai 2 t 1 1 5 2 8 0 l 1 1 1 t 0 6 3 2 7 5 6 2 0 1 6 0 3 6 0 1 . 8 0 9 t 4 8 S 0 5 0 0 9 S 2 1 3 4 0 7 S 0 4 6 tD 2 I t 1 1 5 2 1 e 1 1 0 1 3 1 7 6 2 6 0 2 6 5 3 1 a 0 0 1 6 4 8 t 8 9 0 0 Q 9 9 5 1 5 0 1 9 7 0 4 4 5 0 6 10 1 1 1 2 1 . 2 0 1 5 1 9 1 1 3 0 6 6 1 8 2 2 0 5 4 6 0 t 0 1 . 6 . 9 5 1 4 8 0 0 9 5 4 0 9 1 0 3 9 5 6 7 0 4 0 6 IOI 1 t t 2 5 2 8 0 1 1 1 t2 6 3 2 0 1 6 8 1 1 6 0 0 5 0 4 6 4 8 9 5 0 0 q 9 S 9 1 4 0 3 C 9 5 0 4 6 0 6 ; IO 1 1 1 2 I 2 8 0 1 1 1 t2 3 2 0 1 6 7 t 6 0 0 5 0 9 6 4 8 9 O 0 0 9 9 1 5 0 3 t 9 4 a 4 5 0 6 rat 2 1 I 1 2 i 8 1 1 0 1 r 3 2 6 0 7 2 s 6 0 0 0 9 1 .6 . . . . 4 8 9 0 0 0 9 9 1 5 0 1 3 9 0 4 5 0 4 6
Leed Water Utt08s Adrnn6Ra00n 4 427 4 427
T A o u u ro n r b a m P P x r 6 O c m o E tI c O g n n s o B m oz c d Zone and Freeoon AunarlV 74 4 9 7 5 6 7 7 6 t 8 4 9 7 2 8 6 7 7 2 1 7 4 7 9 2 0 1 6 0 3 2 9 4 15 9 4 1 3 0 9 2 7 5 9 0 5 2 5 2 7 5 5 9 s 3 a 8 6 5 2 7 1 5
C S P L P P I h e m h e g + n h I e a l O t t ) P e g R P r & m B I d t n e s u t e l s T T n N h d h r e 6 a W g te n s T b m s s S t o r u a I n C O t b 8 d o o A n n f r u R O p N O w a r e i O I D b Z M r v e © T b 8 o v r o a y r e n k d s l e o p b m E c x e o p n r o p t s o 8 S r a Z t n u e s c a ies nd Ulwans q t s 3 8 t 1 3 8 2 a 3 6 3 2 8 c 1 4 9 9 e 4 1 0 1 t D 3 9 2 4 4 7 5 6 a 1 1 S 3 B 1 1 3 3 8 2 { & X 3 1 2 8 4 ) 9 0 4 3 0 9 1 0 3 9 2 1 4 0 7 5 6 4 1 1 S 3 8 1 1 O 3 4 9 8 3 7 1 0 3 2 C 9 0 3 3 5 7 3 6 8 0 8 :6 2 3 1 0 0 1 5 3 0 1 1 t 0 4 9 3 3 8 7 0 1 0 2 3 9 9 3 3 5 7 3 0 a 2 6 8 2 0 a 6 3 1 1 1 5 3 9 1 1 4 5 0 1 8 3 2 1 0 7 5 6 0 6 C 0 1 7 7 2 : G 4 6 3 0 2 6 4 O 6 t 1 S 3 9 1 1 C 4 3 1 8 3 O 2 1 7 5 6. 0 0 6 a t 7 4 7 0 2 3 6 6 0 0 2 3 4
A B C C D P S S Z 8 u S o a u w b h u a n u R n S i b G o 8 p B e \ k e w O p C l l t r o e B d p n n C r # m . b m C B e e C ! g e n o E P l e C h v M a n f h c n # e b t e I o e t u e c g n e A n n r n u I V t e t c o a y F o a a r n m f r p d f S t e o D I • d c p e m e r w h e Z E y P D d c v o P e c l O t e d n h p o o A r n 8 m + t t E f + u A \ p e A t g c o 6 h p n r o t p u 0 e e n t n n m r b e a R P o o s e o D m y h n n A f I + € t # t t B y r v > R A a Z d D o u t a o l a o l f O t p a n e o n m e s rW A 8 u n l t honty 2 6 1 2 5 6 2 7 4 2 0 9 5 1 8 6 2 8 1 4 8 8 9 3 2 0 2 0 8 5 8 5 5 1 3 8 0 5 1 3 8 0 0 8 6 2 2 1 4 0 4 1 7 0 a 2 5 g 9 0 a 1 0 2 1 t 2 2 5 6 2 a 2 7 2 4 4 9 5 6 4 r 8 6 8 0 1 4 8 1 9 0 8 2 9 3 2 0 2 5 8 0 6 9 8 5 5 1 3 8 0 0 5 1 1 3 8 0 0 8 6 8 3 3 5 2 7 4 2 8 0 4 8 8 3 8 3 3 7 7 9 2 7 2 4 5 3 6 1 6 4 6 6 1 5 0 0 0 9 9 4 7 0 6 6 2 t 3 4 7 1 2 40 9 0 t 8 2 3 3 5 2 8 4 2 7 2 8 0 4 0 7 8 3 9 8 t 3 7 0 . 5 4 2 2 7 2 1 7 6 1 6 6 4 6 0 3 0 9 7 4 0 9 9 6 0 8 t 3 3 2 4 2 8 4 2 1 5 2 6 9 0 4 8 2 7 5 7 7 6 9 0 8 6 6 9 8 5 8 7 0 7 0 6 8 1 0 8 0 3 6 2 1 4 3 ' 5 2 s 9 a 1 o 2 3 3 2 le 4 4 1 2 5 2 8 2 2 5 a 3 t 7 0 0 8 . . , . 7 0 7 2 8 9 8 6 I 8 0 9 S 9 8 7 7 0 0 0 1 8 8 0 3 6 I
Alua M nn e 8 v oD to o 1 Le 4 e r\ d tn G la o ve D r e n m a e b n p t m U e n n It t s A iA u L 9 G c U nV ) 8 6 8 8 7 7 1 1 1 1 2 2 6 6 5 5 1 1 0 0 3 3 1 t 1 1 6 0 7 7 2 2 ,2 2 7 7 7 7 m9 M:- m6 %7 W7 nB q :EyE1U: 111: : : Mr 3 807 848
1.290.619.097 1.000.225,562 62,312 997.640.025 3.288.546.996 1 .282.053.275 996.219.538 38.781 918.580.931 3.196.892.525 1.280.433.674 988.289.801 &4.670 885240.488 3.153.998.631

### Page 18

+,
ANNEX-B
FY 2024 BUDGET PREPARATION ACTIVITIES WITH REVISED SCHEDULE
As cited in Annex C
Revised schedule
of NBM No. 145
As of February 6, 2023
(dated Jan. 12, 2023)
Encoding and submission (thru OSBPS) of February 1 - April 28, 2023 January 23 - April 28, 2023
i. Past Year's Actual Obligations - B.P. Form Nos. 201 A, B. C, D
ii. FY 2022 - 2026 Revenue Program - B.P. Form Nos. 100, 100-A, B, C
Issuance of NBM for Budget Priorities Framework April 14, 2023 3rd week of March, 2023
Encoding and submission of all BP Forms of FY 2024 Budget Proposals 4th week of March to
April 17 . May 1S, 2023
(thru OSBPS) Details of Tier I (FEs) and Tier 2 (New Spending) April 30, 2023
4th week of March to
,uk>mission of signed hard copies of FY 2024 Budget Proposals April 17 - May 1S, 2023
April 30, 2023
4th week of March to
Conduct of Technical Budget Hearings for Tier 2 (New Spending) Proposals,
April 17 - May 15, 2023
including PCB May 7, 2023

### Page 19

Dep O ar n tm ce en a t t o M f e E n S e e rg c y re (D tv O y E) - & fW 64 7 ® 01 l] mB m 3S s T8V3S 2 : 1 q4 4 0 0 2 : 1 1 2 2 1 m 66 I 4 171 m 9 2 27 814 Ms b t l M & 1 S I I a 0 l 2 lg 0 =rl 1 :1 BIgjEgli SO 935 ERa,W
F)ep O E M & n m n tm w c u e e o n n a n t m t d o b t e e E G n t n S e d y o e r U s a c c u n t I e m e •g t n v e e c y n e m t s n m B d t u re N & a 8 i u r ? e D & Id i Resources ICENR) 1 1 8 8 ; 1 ! 1 7 ! 5 8 0 8 i& 5 7 : 4 3 la T 1 q 1 1 3 1 4 2 -F 0 4 5 0 6 2 F 1 8 7 3 I 3 3 T3 iaiil 3 4 a 0 a 3 0 i 1 D 4 8 6 a 4 1 : t: 2 1 i 3 3 i 5 8 i 2 1 : 1 3 6 6 2 7 9 ; 1 g r : 1 e i 5 l t s . 3 I I 2 8 i 7 t 3 I lO ; r 2 ) 1 5 I 7 5 3 F 1 4 3 : 9 : 4 9 I 0 3 2 t: 9 2 8 mB 3 4 0 0 1 18 0 1 0 2 B 3 2 1 8 3 3 4 4 8 9 7 9 O 7 9 4 8 SS 3 2 1T I 0 5 8 I = S 5 1 3 8 5 T . 8 8 21 0 7 T 1 3 3 m 1 B r 5 g 4 s 2 2 7 t8 37 T 3 = 0 - 3 3 4 3 0 8 0 - . c 3 1 r b B 4 0 T 4 0 I 2 b 2 3 1 9 3 3 9 6 9 2 8 8 8 5 7 1 2 9 9 9 1
N N a & R bo > n n d d H bV q a p & oo r Re r s i o d u rc R e e s s o B u o rc & e d Intormabon Au80nty sa 8 t 2 4 5 1 5 0 9 9 S 08 O . 0 8 0 3 2 5 1 4 1 0 3 9 3 s 24 e S t S 8 O 2 O S 41 39 0 9 s 2 r 4 3 7 4 5 6 3 1 4 1 2 3 4 4 .8 1 8 8 5 3 5 3 0 2 0 5 4 3 1 9 0 9 3 4 2 0 9 6 8 8 3 6 1 4 1 4 3 1 5 . 5 0 2 9 2 6
Pdawan Coup\cI for SaaanU Da,doDmmt StaN SS 584 SO 3t6 m 105 gaa SS 434 50 924 106 358 SS 4:N SI 542 106 976
4H
Dep O 8 a 8 u r n u tm r a r e e e • a n u o i t f o o o h f f f e C I F n u a t S e 9 m u : r o n l e e n d • 8 t v F t y O tw C e ) n F u I e 1 1 8 2 9 4 7 3 6 6 7 8 6 6 0 2 6 7 9 2 5 0 4 3 4 1 4 5 1 S . 2 4 4 5 9 7 3 1 3 7 8 8 5 5 4 4 4 4 2 2 4 4 1 7 3 3 4 1 5 5 0 7 1 0 3 a 1 5 4 2 , 4 1 1 5 5 5 4 0 0 1 2 0 m 1 8 . 7 8 6 8 8 3 6 6 2 8 1 1 5 U t S . . 4 1 7 2 5 s 4 2 7 1 8 0 2 3 3 0 0 8 8 9 9 3 3 : 1 6 0 3 4 1 2 2 0 9 7 3 4 4 5 8 8 0 9 % 1 4 4 5 3 a 6 sl 9 2 3 4 5 1 9 1 1 9 . . 7 8 4 5 i3 7 3 . : 2 6 'n 1 B 5 I : M 4 t B 4 08 9 4 3 7 5 2 6 3 6 26 682 3 3 9 9 6 6 8 1 0 . . W 1 0 5 0 7 0 8 2 1 3 4 2 . : 9 3 : 7 3 S 7 1a . 1 2 7 CL : 7 4 8 1 7 :+
B Bu u r r e e a n u o o f f L th e e e T d I G en o a v t r V nmn! FInance 2 5 3 1 3 6 6 4 9 2 6 9 11 t 1 5 1 2 9 4 1 8 6 7 2 3 2 0 3 2 5 9 3 0 2 9 3 4 9 0 3 9 1 7 2 t 9 S 4 2 S 3 t6 3 6 4 9 2 6 9 1 1 4 3 4 t 3 3 0 1 3 5 2 302 gas 3 2 9 7 5 7 0 9 6 9 5 9 3 2 5 3 1 3 6 6 4 9 2 6 9 1 1 4 16 5 9 e 3 g 6 g 2 302 909 3 2 93 7 6 8 . 2 7 7 9 4 5
C bn rI + ed In ce B oa C om o m f A nu ss a e n ssment Appeds 2 I 4 S 1 0 4 2 4 4 7 249 2 . O 53 S 4 3 49 1 0 7 5 5 5 0 8 0 24 tS t a 4 2 4 4 7 24 2 9 5 05 8 3 : 4 1 9 7 0 6 so 0 a 4 2 1 4 5 1 0 4 2 4 4 7 24 2 9 6 0 2 5 6 3 49 1 0 7 . 5 6 0 5 3 0
P N n H m n t n a d 8 t T w n a R n r d 9 M ez a c n h a g C e e m n e te n r t Otf€8 9 T 4 O 2 1 3 4 7 1 2 2 0 0 0 3 9 9 7 9 2 675 1 1 1 0 4 1 3 2 3 1 4 5 9 7 4 8 2 t 3 41 7 2 2 0 0 4 7 5 8 9 6 1 9 1 8 4 . . g 8 O 96 T 9 7 4 8 2 1 3 4 7 1 2 2 0 t 8 1 2 4 7 0 t 1 9 5 9 0 28 8 1 4
DepH O F T U P t O r e N m N & c I E 8 0 e e h S n 9 d n o C t n e c n f o O d S O m I C N K d F e g C w o o S b r o a e e & o p m c n g e r I d n n e m r s t 8 A & C 6 t n B H y e o n u & m o t C n 8 n m o c a t t D n 9 ,n F 0 v e A n ia t I o i o n f t t g h B e F e o P P r h c I l l e p + s p p p n l n ne6 8 8 7 8 1 6 0 t 1 2 6 2 0 7 6 0 7 7 2 5 1 3 4 8 7 2 2 3 3 8 6 6 0 I 1 1 1 7 7 8 4 1 t 1 5 2 2 7 t 0 2 5 8 4 9 S 7 3 2 3 8 8 6 3 6 3 8 1 1 2 2 7 7 2 1 6 2 9 5 6 B 0 5 5 a 0 a 0 0 2 2 1 1 8 7 7 2 3 6 3 3 6 5 3 9 0 7 8 3 8 6 9 4 1 1 0 0 0 9 2 6 4 9 8 8 8 , 8 7 0 6 1 1 1 7 2 0 0 2 6 7 0 7 2 5 1 4 3 8 7 2 2 3 6 3 8 6 0 1 1 2 2 0 Q 5 : t t tO O 2 9 1 , 7 2 7 6 8 2 9 S 3 8 4 6 1 9 S 9 4 4 1 t 2 2 7 7 2 2 5 5 0 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 , 1 0 7 2 3 4 0 3 4 4 3 0 4 . 5 0 7 1 2 3 2 9 2 1 8 3 2 5 3 0 4 4 8 8 , 8 7 3 6 1 1 1 7 2 2 0 6 6 l , 7 2 0 7 5 1 4 7 3 8 2 2 3 8 6 3 6 0 1 1 : 2 3 30 5 1 I I t B S 2 2 7 4 s 8 9 5 s 2 8 4 4 3 a 5 5 2 9 t t 1 2 2 7 7 2 2 5 5 0 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 4 2 3 9 7 2 3 3 2 6 3 4 4 9 9 7 4 6 1 7 3 6 6 6 4 4 1 8 9 3 '
C)+p O N 8 a n n B m e o e a n a d l t o N : t n u H o r e f S e d e o f c t n r e I C D t# o O y u H rte ) d gg: J 88 B 298 ; 8 9: 8 3 1 1 1 2 9 : 6 9 9 0 3 9 9 3 : 3 7 1 ;88: 8: 1::7 2 8 : 7 ; B 8 35 ig i: iB 87 ; g ;9 tI R80 i 2 Pn 0 3 m 0 t2 7 9 5 {3g g: gg 1 l 92 6 2 8 9 8 1 T 0 I 4 S a -3 8 - 0 o 9 a 8 7 T 7 6 - 4 9 T 3 1 T 9 1 i; ; 2 0 ii 6 i 7 i 8 i 6 ;iggigi iii 3 29 8 4 ; 6 g 97 ?
Ph+OPIneN a8end AIDS Councl 25 749 IS 372 41 121 m25 749 tS 649 41 398 2S 749 IS 931 41 680
Dep O H vt u n m m ce e a n n o t f S o h t ! t e f H e n y S e m e n c n s r e S t# A e y c d k Ju n d 8 c f. a B o n v a CO U F ri n iv m r S D 9c e n bebpmtnt tDHSUC>I 9 6 3 8 8 1 7 a 7 7 G 0 0 6 i 1 l 0 6 3 2 0 6 3 4 5 9 9 3 6 4 4 8 1 8 9 == 1 6 S 6 6 S 2 7 9 7 0 8 21 1 0 +7 85 : 2 : 4 - 2 ; 9 - 307 997 h 1 o 43 588 U 4 S 51 SBS M 33 4 7 997 M 1 2 45 1 :2 U 45 l 4 169
Dtpa O N N C em a f a I I t O c t I e g n e a n r c n t o I o d d f M o P D T l n e e h e , l h a f e o S c \ c r ' l t 3 m % s m t a C l 8 e n 8 o t u e # R m n n y c o m a 3 n 9 n : 1 6 d a 0 c n n C n d g o C m C o m o a m u r r r r ' r d I , r ' s a a b l a o o n n n g C T n N tr hnoklgV tDIC T) 1 2 8 : 1 9 e 9 0 2 4 3 9 3 6 6 7 5 I I S T 5 1 6 S S 4 6 3 S S 8 3 ' ' t 4 3 9 1 6 7 9 0 / 0 2 l 4 2 3 e 9 5 0 0 I 7 1 ? 8 1 I ,S S S S S S 0 9 4 4 s 5 m 4 : 2 s 3 5 7 4 3 34 0 4 5 5 8 : 9 4 m 2 a 1 6 9 2 3 4 6 5 ' 1 7 8 9 6 9 3 E 1 8 1 g 4 4 9 1 9 3 : 9 0 7 ' 9 7 3 :: 8 3 1 ; -T -{- 4 : 7 3 5 i 5 8 T 6 S 9 B O 0 I 9 T IO 2 1 e 6 9 2 B 3 4 6 7 5 t t S 7 1 8 6 9 6 3 MI 1 I I S S 4 a T 4 5 9 ?? 5 2 T 4 7 :l555 e:5 ; 7 4 2 2 : 3 7 6 I 9 7 0 i;5 1 1 3 2 9 1 6 7 :
DtOa O B B L N N N tm e u u 4 g a P l r e 8 b l e e e c o 0 o d n 4 a e n n n ! u u G d d d o Q O f w o h C P Y f f f e e o t F J & o h r u a f n m e e e S : I h # r e b M e r P c C C l u e n a I r Q o o s e w n t m m o t a U A a n g p r e r c n y e r n o t • e 6 a m d d n s e n e e s o H m n i n t o o t I n r y e a a d n m d G P F e o t n f v i : n e H r e n o s m W ( e O nt n c (a e I L o O n ) Mugm AHar6) 22 2 7 4 1 0 5 6 8 2 7 1 7 7 2 7 4 3 8 1 3 8 0 9 5 3 6 6 2 4 9 6 0 3 0 5 l 2 s 3 8 2 3 5 2 2 e 4 3 9 2 0 1 : 3 3 2 1 2 4 0 0 2 t 1 2 a 4 3 7 6 8 7 6 B 4 8 4 8 8 6 4 , 7 6 1 9 8 6 1 2 7 3 7 2 4 3 3 2 2 7 6 4 8 0 3 9 3 I , T a 1 s 3 D 0 i 4 a e 6 0 d 2 2 3 9 1 2S 2 5 8 6 6 O 5 0 8 8 9 2 2 5 2 9 7 2 ; 3 3 0 2 2 8 0 5 1 4 3 2 2 3 3 3 2 3 7 0 8 9 6 4 8 3 3 8 a a 9 4 4 T 8 6 4 s 5 5 t 9 a 2 0 3 9 0 S 2 2 1 I 4 S 4 1 3 3 2 6 7 t t 8 7 7 0 5 8 2 3 2 s 8 1 8 4 9 5 4 $ 8 4 0 3 3 2 6 2 4 9 H 6 6 7 4 1 3 a 2 8 9 32 2 2 7 , 8 9 0 2 3 t 1 5 6 9 6 7 4 1 2 7 3 7 4 1 6 0 6 , 3 6 6 5 7 2 0 8 4 5 7 6 3 7 5 4 4 ? 0 5 1 7 0 3 3 1 6 4 le 0 0 o 2 1 5 6 9 8 1 6 6 8 8 2 1 4 2 1 7 2 9 2 6 5 1 7 t 8 0 1 3 9 6 1 7 6 0 2 5 0 7 0 6 8 0 9 6 1 3 1 9 7 4 e 4 ; 1 7 8 9 2 6 5 6 8 7 5 9 4 3 2 2 3 I 4 S 3 4 1 . , . , 3 2 6 1 7 1 0 5 e 7 2 7 3 8 1 8 9 5 4 5 5 2 4 6 8 4 3 3 2 3 4 6 9 3 8 7 2 5 3 4 0 4 2 9 1 3 .3 3 2 7 3 4 0 1 3 1 1 2 4 1 5 1 1 6 2 7 3 3 7 0 3 8 8 8 2 4 5 4 o 7 1 5 8 3 4 4 9 7 1 a 5 5 2 4 7 5 7 i 3 1 6 4 la 0 0 a 2 t 5 6 9 1 6 8 8 8 6 2 2 2 5 7 2 7 2 0 2 8 7 2 8 0 t 1 C S 0 1 1 0 8 2 8 6 0 7 3 9 3 I S 9 9 8 0 5 7 IS 2 5 7 6 5 3 ; 9 I S 2 7 3 4 8
P \V h e l r p n p e oe Commun on Women IN aand Camm6sona n Bre Rob of FAono 58 243 35 331 800 IS 379 57 440 56 055 It 3 495 57 440
a-+DFee NB:nd Pche q:1 : SS :63 IS 36 B 59:: : lee ay; : 92 7 ; 3 es! 'S6 +99.597 : 3 336: 63S ' 8: 352 232 166.499,537 iS 783 974 2 103 caB aB 383 ST T
PhIl>one Putlk 96188 CoMBe 35r SBa 455 002 IO 400 816 992 350 360 467 864 818232 350.368 481 It: 831 479
De0 C B B L N 8 n r u > a u t r d m I H r e c e b ) e a a n R o n u d o u t e o f o o a h B f f f £ e u J C t S m r u o e Z S U n r a 8 r e l u @ 0 £ : c r n e o P r t O r f ( A J , D h n n o u s u O n b s a J H ) m : y . 2 8 4 3 t s 1 , 6 1 5 2 2 1 9 9 3 5 3 t 7 9 1 2 0 5 2 B 7 3 3 2 7 6 0 8 5 I S 8 9 6 7 t S 2 , 6 0 4 6 7 2 7 3 1 3 2 1 5 9 4 4 4 7, 4 6 2 9 7 t 5 9 5 4 7 1 P 0 4 2 3 7 eVan 3 2 3 5 2 3 6 1 1 0 2 0 8 0 , , 1 2 0 2 8 2 2 9 0 9 0 0 1 0 0 3 0 4 2 9 6 9 1 t 1 , 0 2 6 7 8 9 1 7 2 5 4 8 6 7 2 0 7 t 7 9 1 0 B 0 4 0 9 5 2 O 7 6 3 9 2 : 2 4 1 1 1 : : 2 5 2 t : s : 8 5 t ; 9 r 5 0 j 2 2 : 3 3 : 5 7 6 6 7 6 8 5 s 2 0 4 6 7 i 4 2 5 3 : 9 3 8 1 : & s 1 3 8 e 6 3 1 4 e 8 1 6 5 2 2 4 7 0 9 6 1 2 4 0 t 0 1 O 0 0 0 2 6 : 1 1 : : 6 7 8 9 8 2 0 5 8 :: 0 0 2 : ; 4 9 a 0 : 1 2 2 t 3 4 5 3 2 2 4 1 : t 1 : . , 5 2 1 2 1 5 ; 9 0 1 ; 0 1 5 9 : , : 2 3 3 2 : 5 7 ; 5 5 6 6 5 7 2 ' 0 4 6 7 :: 6 3 3 6 ; 0 2 7 : ; 5 6 9 9 ; S 8 8 1 i 6 9 4 6 2 2 4 3 e tD aD a 2 6 1 T ' : 6 : T 8 9 : 8 5 t t : O a : 2 2 : : 9 0 2 2 2 5 4 9 2 4 1 2
O C O ) n n IN e c : e e f o o o f f r t n h A e e R G S e O m ov I a C e b r l v t n O o m r D G e l n e 9 t n u e C U rd o R rp 8 o so ra b e b a C n ounsel t 1 0 4 8 4 1 4 3 2 0 8 6 6 7 7 5 9 2 4 7 5 5 5 4 8 0 1 3 0 4 3 8 2 t 2 3 9 1 3 9 5 0 0 2 0 2 0 7 1 0 3 1 1 0 4 8 4 4 1 3 2 0 8 6 6 7 7 5 9 2 4 S 7 S 6 0 6 0 4 6 4 9 7 9 3 t 2 3 9 3 2 6 0 2 9 1 3 3 1 7 4 4 2 1 t 0 8 4 4 4 1 3 2 0 8 6 6 7 7 5 9 2 4 5 8 7 6 1 4 1 9 2 4 2 1 4 2 1 2 3 3 9 ? 1 5 7 . 6 8 t8 8 2 9 6 3
P P P a r u u r t o + d le c e n n A t d a Id w n P C 8 r y o o ' m s b a m O to f a R n + ; A e a d n m e n n r G sV o a o t d o n Go.Hnment S 7 1 T 5 6 2 9 8 1 6 8 0 8 6 7 6 4 7 1 1 6 4 5 2 0 0 9 S : 7 4 2 2 3 1 7 2 0 7 0 0 0 0 : 9 3 1 1 0 87 6 9 6 9 IO 5 0 8 S 0 S 7 t 1 2 6 5 1 8 9 6 8 0 8 6 7 6 4 7 1 1 6 4 5 3 3 4 7 0 3 5 3 t4 8 5 : see S 9 3 1 1 1 8 2 3 7 4 7 39 4 6 1 4 9 5 7 1 1 6 2 5 8 1 9 6 8 0 8 6 7 6 4 7 1 IS 6 4 O 3 6 6 4 O 8 2 ' 2 2 7 I SOO S g t 3 8 1 iS 6 7 8 3 0 4 1 8 6 3 9
Dep O } # n N s lm b e b e I n t o e t f o I h O f e l L L a S a o o e r r c r n e S t d e N y d E 8 m S ploypunt (DOLE ) 7 t 6 9 S 5 3 3 I 6 7 7 1 2 5 82 8 9 2 t 4 3 9 30 5 1 4 0 6 7 6 9 2 1 8 3 3 5 1, 2 5 8 82 8 0 8 4 4 4 1 W7 48 742 i' ii 3 i 1 : 7 : 5 ; 9 T:': : 1 : 7 : 2 :: 8 5 8 22:: :4: :42 49 l8 04 ; 7 ! T9 3 3 1 : : 7 i 5 f 9 a4 17 599 286:II I#6£ 4 ' 9 S 3 ; 5 i 8
N N a 4 a t a o n n d d C La O i n o C , l 1 R 38 e 9 I r n \ o a n nd s t C e o le m d m a0 rS 0n S O B n oBd 1 1 2 8 2 6 5 3 7 0 8 5 7 :1 9 0 0 4 1 5 7 3 ? 1 2 4 7 3 6 € 4 2 8 4 2 0 t 1 2 8 2 6 5 l 7 a 8 s 7 : 9 1 1 4 7 :4 9 4 t 1 2 4 7 4 8 0 0 0 9 2 9 8 1 l 2 e : 6 5 3 7 0 8 5 7 2 9 1 3 8 4 ag 4 B 0 1 2 44 7 3 9 .O 7 B 4 S 5
N P T • e r b a c o h fn n n 9 €d d 0 W n E d a d g u R e c e • a g u lo u d n b bo P a n n r o d C c s A o a rc m s lh a ld D x y w e C v lo o e n m lo m pm aw en o t n Auther4y 3 1 9 t 8 7 1 2 3 7 5 4 7 3 2 4 0 5 0 9 7 1 8 9 8 1 2 2 . . . 6 8 0 0 6 2 8 5 2 1 27 23 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 1 3 2 7 5 7 3 7 5 8 1 3 0 9 9 3 6 5 3 2 3. 1 9 0 8 7 3 2 2 9 . . . 3 9 4 3 5 5 0 0 4 9 7 S 9 5 2 3 S 1 2 0 9 5 6 1 1 4 9 2 234 330 1 1 4 2 7 7 2 7 9 4 5 9 . 0 7 7 1 0 0 + 4 3 3 1 9 03 8 7 9 2 2 . 4 5 9 5 3 5 4 0 0 91 7 $ 1 0 4 4 9 9 3 3 4 ) S 4 1 I 71 .602 12 1 . . 2 2 6 2 7 8 S 2 7 4 2 4 6 9 0 4 1 7
A-
Doa O n O m S \+ e c r n e s t e o a f o s n I W o M o I S r g k r e e a c r n s re t W t W & o y e r4 Ia e re rs A 1 D d W rrv I ils I tr3tlon 2 1 1 3 H 0 5 1 a 0 0 0 1 1 2 8 5 9 7 8 t 1 3 2 0 0 1 9 6 4 1 2 3 8 6 3 7 1 4 3 8 8 0 n= . 3 I s s a o a a 1 It 3 5 4 9 4 8 2 1 7 8 6 0 8 1 3 0 4 5 8 7 2 t t , 3 3 00 4 4 1 2 0 . 9 0 0 9 2 2 7 6 9 1 tO ; ? 93 :7 4 ' 5 !! 2 ? 6 Us 1 1 1 1 ! 9 is 3 6 0 5 5 2 : 3 t t : a : c i’ l 8 9 2 97 : 1 10 2 g :7 sa 1 6 60 ; i 6 m It s 952 603
