# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 014

**Date:** 27 June 2024
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 014
**Subject:** DOJ OFFICIAL BASKETBALL TEAM FOR THE UNTV EXECUTIVE BASKETBALL CUP SEASON 4
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2024/DC_2024/DC%20014.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC 014.pdf

---

## Subject

DOJ OFFICIAL BASKETBALL TEAM FOR THE UNTV EXECUTIVE BASKETBALL CUP SEASON 4

## Transcription

### Page 1

Republika ng Pilipinas
KAGAWARAN NG KATARUNGAN
Department of Justice
Manila
BAGONG PJ
a14
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.
Un•,a•==
FOR All Undersecretaries/Assistant Secretaries
All Heads of Bureaus, Commissions and Offices
attached to the Department
All Chiefs of Service/Staff in the Office of the Secretary
All Concerned
SUBJECT 127th Philippine Independence Day Celebration on
June 12, 2025
DATE
JUN 22&3
This refers to the attached letter from the National Historical Commission
of the Philippines (NHCP) inviting this Department to the 127th Anniversary of the
Proclamation of the Philippine Independence (Kalayaan 2025) with the theme,
“Kalayaan, Kinabukasan, Kasaysayan.”
In support to the Independence Day celebration, you are hereby enjoined
to participate in the 2025 Independence Day Parade on June 12, 2025.
The following Offi as are directed to send personnel to witness the said
parade on official time.
Offices No. of Attendees
Department of Justice (Proper) 15
Bureau of Corrections (BuCor) 10
Bureau of Immigration (Bl) 10
Land Registration Authority (LRA) 10
National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) 10
Office for Alternative Dispute Resolution ( C)ADR) 10
Office of the Government Corporate Counsel (OGCC 10
Office of the Solicitor General (OSG) 10
Parole and Probation Administration (PPA) 10
Presidential Commission on GotH Government (PCGG) 10
Public Attorney’s Office (PAO) 10
The official call time br the Independence Day Flag-raising Ceremony
at the Rizal National Monument, Rkal Park, Manila is set at 5:00 AM. The
premises will be luRed down by the Presidential Security Group (PSG) at 6:00
AM and the Ceremony will commence promptly at 7:00 AM, followed immediately
by the Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand.

### Page 2

F
Attendees to the June 12 parade are encouraged to wear the official
Kalayaan 2025 polo shirts while participants to the Pampamahalaang Programa
at Serbisyo (PPS) on June 10 and 11 are encouraged to wear the round neck t-
shirts, the design of which may be downloaded by scanning the QR code
provided.
For the PPS, participating agencies may begin setting up their booths as
early as June 7, 2025.
The funds for the Kalayaan 2025 shirts including the provision of food and
display of streamers shall be charged against the budget/funds of your respective
Offices
For clarifications/questions, please refer to the NHCP staff, Mr. Jose Alec
D. Geradila at 0917-5523881 or at email jadgerdila©2nhcp.gov.ph,
For strict compliance.
PIN C. REMULLA
'cretary
Department of Justice
0202505318
Enel.: As stated

### Page 3

National
Historical
Commission of the
Philippines
4 April 2025
SECRETARY JESUS CRISPIN C. REMULLA
Department of Justice
Padre Faura Street, Ermita, Manila
Tel. No.: 8521-8348
Email: osec@doi.gov.ph
Dear Secretary Remulla,
Greetings from the National Historical Commission of the Philippines (NHCP)!
On 12 June 2025, the nation will celebrate the 127th Anniversary of the Proclamation of
Philippine Independence (Kalayaan 2025), with the theme “Kalayaan, Kinabukasan,
Kasaysayan." The NHCP, in collaboration with other government agencies and instrumentalities,
local government units, and the private sector, will lead the independence Day flag-raising and
wreath-laying rites at the Rizal National Monument. Rizal Park, Manila, at 7:00 a.m. followed by
the Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand. His Excellency President Ferdinand R.
Marcos Jr. has been invited as the Guest of Honor.
In light of this national occasion, we respectfully invite the Honorable Secretary to join us
during the activities.
Likewise, we request your esteemed agency to provide 100 DOJ employees to witness
the Independence Day Parade. Parade attendees are encouraged to wear the official Kalayaan
2025 shirts which shall be provided by their respective representing agencies. The design may
be downloaded by scanning the QR code below.
Furthermore, to foster great engagement across all government agencies and
instrumentalities, we also invite your agency to participate at the Pampamahalaang Prog rama at
Serbisyo on 10-11 June 2025 at the Rizal Park. This event provides opportunity to showcase your
agency’s mandate and services.
Should you have any questions, please refer to the following NHCP staffs:
Pampamahalaang 0915-638-9577
Ar. Crisanto B. Lustre
Proqrama at Serb ’0 cbtustre 'nhc FOV.ph
Kalayaan 2025 0917-5892319
Eleonor B. Samonte
tndeDendence D Rites ebsamont tov.ph
2025 Indepmce Day T917-55£igg {
Josef Alec D. Geradila
Parade tdqeradiia }nhl rav. ph
&
Ifff IHIHIHHlllll1lll1lIH11f 11111}1111111
NHCP OUT-2025-1 1 51
N.H.C.P. Building. T.M. Kalaw St. (02) 5335-1200
Ermita, Manila, The Philippines, records@nhcp.gov. ph
P.O. Box 3374 nhcp.gOV.ph

### Page 4

Thank you.
Very truly yours,
IIV
CARMiNDA R. AREVALO
Executive Director
and Chairman, Kalayaan 2025
Technical Working Committe
