# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 009

**Date:** 08 April 2025
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 009
**Subject:** AMENDING MINISTRY ORDER NO. 210 DATED DECEMBER 01, 1980 PRESCRIBING THE PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING APPLICATIONS FOR AUTHORITY TO EMPLOY FOREIGN TECHNICAL PERSONNEL IN A WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY NATIONALIZED TRADE, BUSINESS, INDUSTRY OR UNDERTAKING
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2025/DC/DC%20009.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC 009.pdf

---

## Subject

AMENDING MINISTRY ORDER NO. 210 DATED DECEMBER 01, 1980 PRESCRIBING THE PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING APPLICATIONS FOR AUTHORITY TO EMPLOY FOREIGN TECHNICAL PERSONNEL IN A WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY NATIONALIZED TRADE, BUSINESS, INDUSTRY OR UNDERTAKING

## Transcription

### Page 1

Republika ng Pilipinas
KAGAWARAN NG KATARUNGAN
Department of lustice
Manila
4 +- }; :
NO.au
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR
TO Undersecretaries/ Assistant Secretaries
All Heads of DOJ Attached/Constituent Agencies
All Regional/Provincial/City Prosecutors
Chiefs of Service/Staff of the DOJ Central Office
All Concerned
SUBJECT • Standardization and Official Use of DOJ Logos
DATE
• 0 6 MAR2 026
In the interest of the service and to ensure consistency and proper
identification/representation of the Department of Justice (DOJ) and its
attached/constituent agencies, as well as their respective personnel, in their official
affairs, dealings and transactions, the official logos of the DOJ shall be exclusively as
follows:
Particular
Logo
Application:
• Stationery
• Pins
• Official Paraphernalia
• Other Small-Format Items
Specifications:
• Height : 2.91 cm
(A4 size)
• Fonts Style : Times
New Roman (All Caps)
1

### Page 2

Logo Particular
Application
:
• Building Signage
• Infrastructure Elements
• Decorative Insignia
Specifications
:
• Diameter : 117 cm
• Material : Brass
sheet
• Thickness : 1.5 mm
• Fonts Style : Times
New Roman (All Caps)
The adoption of a single, uniform, and standardized logo for said particular
purpose is essential to eliminate inconsistencies, enhance the brand identities of the
Department and its attached/constituent agencies, and ensure conformity with
approved guidelines. You may access and download the e-copies of said logos at
https : //www .doj .gov. ph/doj-official-logo. html .
All other versions or variations of DOJ logos that do not conform to the above
specified logos are hereby suspended and must be discontinued.
This Circular takes effect immediately, supersedes all issuances inconsistent
herewith, and shall remain in force until further orders.
For information, guidance, and strict compliance.
'iEDDERICK A. VIDA
Secretary
Department of Justice
Copy furnished : CN: 0202603154
All concerned. IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
2
