# DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 015

**Date:** 09 June 2025
**Document:** DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO. 015
**Subject:** PROCLAMATION NO. 911 DATED 21 MAY 2025
**PDF:** [Download](https://www.doj.gov.ph/files/2025/DC/DC%20015%20dated%2009%20June%202025.pdf)
**Local PDF:** pdfs/DC 015 dated 09 June 2025.pdf

---

## Subject

PROCLAMATION NO. 911 DATED 21 MAY 2025

## Transcription

### Page 1

Department
grice
ManfTa
j 3
DEPARTMENT CIRU %
C 1U!HF1111N 11E 1 ) B I
in n n
FOR All Undenecretaries/Assistant Secretaries
All Heads of Bureaus, Commissions and Offices
attached to the Department
The Prosecutor General and Chief State Counsel
All Regional/Provincial/City Prosecutors of the National
Prosecution Service
Heads of Services//Offices/Programs
Staff in the Office of the Secretary
Records Management Section
DOJ Library
All Concerned
SUBJECT Proclamation No. 911 dated 21 May 2025
DATE
JUN - 9 2023
Attached is a copy of Proclamation No. 911 dated 21 May 2025 from the
Office of the President signed by Executive Secretary Lucas P. Bersamin entitled
“DECLARING FRIDAY, 06 JUNE 2025, A REGULAR HOLIDAY
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY IN OBSERVANCE OF EIDUL ADHA (FEAST
OF SACRIFICE).”
Let the certified copy thereof be kept in the DOJ Records Management
Section.
For information and guidance.
RAUL T. VASQ
Undersecretary and OfRcg>-in-Charge
Per D.O. No. 383 dated 02 June 2025
End.: As stated

### Page 2

+
MALACANAN PALACE
PROCLAMATION NO. 911
DECLARING FRIDAY, 06 JUNE 2025, A REGULAR HOLIDAY THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY, IN OBSERVANCE OF EIDUL ADHA (FEAST OF
SACRIFICE)
WHEREAS , Eidul Adha (Eid’I Adha) or the Feast of Sacrifice is one of the two
greatest feasts of Islam ;
WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 9849 declared the Tenth day of Zhul Hijja, the
Twelfth month of the Islamic Calendar, a national holiday for the observance of Eid’I
Adha, with a movable date;
WHEREAS, following the 1446 Hijrah Islamic Lunar Calendar, the National
Commission on Muslim Filipinos has recommended that 06 June 2025, Friday, be
declared a national holiday, in observance of Eid’I Adha',
NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare Friday,
06 June 2025, a regular holiday throughout the country, in observance of Eid’I Adha.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal
of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.
Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of May , in the year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Twenty Five. A
e
/
)
By the President:
\
sAHIH
’autive !tary
bk;';v
m’
THE PRESIDENr OF THE PH[LEPP: Y. T€)LENTIN0-NAVA
/ r, Tri rrTr\n
