# Executive Order No. 103

**DIVIDING REGION IV INTO REGION IV-A AND REGION IV-B, TRANSFERRING THE PROVINCE OF AURORA TO REGION III AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 103
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2002/eo_103_2002.html)

---

> **MALACAÑANG**
> Manila
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
>
>
> **Executive Order No. 103             May 17, 2002**
>
> **DIVIDING REGION IV INTO REGION IV-A AND REGION IV-B, TRANSFERRING THE PROVINCE OF AURORA TO REGION III AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**
>
> **WHEREAS,** Article X, Section 4 of the Constitution provides that the President shall exercise general supervision over local government units;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the administrative regions were established to promote efficiency in the Government, accelerate social and economic development and improve public services;
>
> **WHEREAS,** to further accelerate the social and economic development of the provinces and cities comprising Region IV and improve the delivery of public services, there is a need to divide Region IV and transfer the Province of Aurora to Region III.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Region IV is hereby divided into Region IV-A and Region IV-B.
>
> **Section 2.** Region IV-A shall be known as CALABARZON and shall be composed of the following provinces and cities:
>
> a. Provinces
>
> i. Batangas
>
> ii. Cavite
>
> iii. Laguna
>
> iv. Quezon
>
> v. Rizal
>
> b. Cities
>
> i. Antipolo City
>
> ii. Batangas City
>
> iii. Calamba City
>
> iv. Cavite City
>
> v. Lipa City
>
> vi. Lucena City
>
> vii. San Pablo City
>
> viii. Tagaytay City
>
> ix. Tanauan City
>
> x. Trece Martires City
>
> **Section 3.** Region IV-B shall be known as MIMAROPA and shall be composed of the following provinces and cities:
>
> a. Provinces
>
> i. Marinduque
>
> ii. Mindoro Occidental
>
> iii. Mindoro Oriental
>
> iv. Palawan
>
> v. Romblon
>
> b. Cities
>
> i. Calapan City
>
> ii. Puerto Princesa City
>
> **Section 4.** The Province of Aurora is hereby transferred to and shall form part of Region III.
>
> **Section 5.** The Department of the Interior and Local Government is hereby directed to supervise the division of Region IV into Region IV-A and Region IV-B and the transfer of the Province of Aurora to Region III.
>
> **Section 6.** All orders, rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 7.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.
>
> City of Manila, May 17, 2002.
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
>
>
> By the President:
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **AVELINO U. CRUZ, JR.**
> *OIC, Office of the Executive Secretary*
>
>
>
