# GR-190102

**Accenture, Inc. Vs. Commissioner of Internal Revenue**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: Accenture, Inc. Vs. Commissioner of Internal Revenue
- **Ponente**: Sereno, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2012/jul2012/gr_190102_2012.html)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> **SUPREME COURT**
> Manila
>
> **SECOND DIVISION**
>
> **G.R. No. 190102               July 11, 2012**
>
> ACCENTURE, INC., Petitioner,
>
> vs.
> **COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE,** Respondent.
>
> D E C I S I O N
>
> **SERENO, *J.:***
>
> This is a Petition filed under Rule 45 of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure, praying for the reversal of the Decision of the Court of Tax Appeals En Banc (CTA En Banc ) dated 22 September 2009 and its subsequent Resolution dated 23 October 2009.1
>
> Accenture, Inc. (Accenture) is a corporation engaged in the business of providing management consulting, business strategies development, and selling and/or licensing of software.2  It is duly registered with the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) as a Value Added Tax (VAT) taxpayer or enterprise in accordance with Section 236 of the National Internal Revenue Code (Tax Code).3
>
> On 9 August 2002, Accenture filed its Monthly VAT Return for the period 1 July 2002 to 31 August 2002 (1st period). Its Quarterly VAT Return for the fourth quarter of 2002, which covers the 1st period, was filed on 17 September 2002; and an Amended Quarterly VAT Return, on 21 June 2004.4  The following are reflected in Accenture’s VAT Return for the fourth quarter of 2002:5
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **Purchases** | **Amount** |
