# Republic Act No. 11727

**AN ACT DECLARING JUNE 21 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL NONWORKING HOLIDAY IN TAGAYTAY CITY, PROVINCE OF CAVITE IN COMMEMORATION OF ITS FOUNDATION DAY TO BE KNOWN AS "CHARTER DAY OF TAGAYTAY CITY" OR "ARAW NG TAGAYTAY," AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10775**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11727
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11727_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11727, April 29, 2022 ]**
>
> AN ACT DECLARING JUNE 21 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL NONWORKING HOLIDAY IN TAGAYTAY CITY, PROVINCE OF CAVITE IN COMMEMORATION OF ITS FOUNDATION DAY TO BE KNOWN AS "CHARTER DAY OF TAGAYTAY CITY" OR "ARAW NG TAGAYTAY," AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10775
>
> By it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Section of Republic Act No. 10775 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 1.** June 21 of every year is hereby declared as special nonworking holiday in Tagaytay City, Province of Cavite in commemoration of its foundation day to be known as "Charter Day of Tagaytay City" or "Araw ng Lungsod ng Tagaytay".
>
> **Section 2.** Section 2 of Republic Act No. 10775 is hereby repealed.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **LORD ALLAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on December 17, 2019 and January 31, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: APR 29 2022
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
