# Republic Act No. 11820

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE GUIMBAL, ILOILO EXTENSION OFFICE OF THE LAND TRANSPORTATION OFFICE (LTO) INTO A REGULAR LTO CLASS “D” DISTRICT OFFICE TO BE LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUIMBAL, PROVINCE OF ILOILO**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11820
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11820_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11820, June 02, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE GUIMBAL, ILOILO EXTENSION OFFICE OF THE LAND TRANSPORTATION OFFICE (LTO) INTO A REGULAR LTO CLASS “D” DISTRICT OFFICE TO BE LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUIMBAL, PROVINCE OF ILOILO**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** *Conversion.* - The existing Guimbal, Iloilo Extension Office of the Land Transportation Office (LTO) is hereby converted into a regular LTO Class “D” District Office to be located in the Municipality of Guimbal, Province of Iloilo.
>
> **Section 2.** *Appropriations.* - The Secretary of Transportation shall immediately include in the Department's program the operationalization of LTO Class “D” District Office in the Municipality of Guimbal, Province of Iloilo, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of Guimbal, Iloilo LTO Extension Office. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued operation of the regular LTO district office shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** *Implementing Rules and Regulations.* - The Assistant Secretary of the LTO, in consultation with the Secretary of the DOTr, shall formulate immediately the necessary rules and regulations to carry out the purposes of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on January 20, 2021 and January 31, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: Lapsed into law on JUN 02, 2022 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
