# Republic Act No. 11803

**AN ACT DIVIDING BARANGAY PASONG PUTIK IN QUEZON CITY INTO THREE (3) DISTINCT AND INDEPENDENT BARANGAYS TO BE KNOWN AS BARANGAY PASONG PUTIK PROPER, BARANGAY GREATER LAGRO AND BARANGAY NORTH FAIRVIEW**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11803
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11803_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11803, June 02, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT DIVIDING BARANGAY PASONG PUTIK IN QUEZON CITY INTO THREE (3) DISTINCT AND INDEPENDENT BARANGAYS TO BE KNOWN AS BARANGAY PASONG PUTIK PROPER, BARANGAY GREATER LAGRO AND BARANGAY NORTH FAIRVIEW**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** *Division of Barangay Pasong Putik.* - Barangay Pasong Putik in Quezon City is hereby divided into three (3) distinct and independent barangays to be known as Barangay Pasong Putik Proper, Barangay Greater Lagro and Barangay North Fairview.
>
> **Section 2.** *Territorial Boundaries.* - The territorial boundaries of each barangay created in the preceding section are hereby described as follows:
>
> (1) Barangay Pasong Putik Proper
>
> "Bounded on the North by Caloocan City and Quezon City Boundary;
> On the East by Belfast Street, Caloocan City and Quezon City Boundary;
> On the West by Kaligayahan/New haven and Teresa Heights Boundary; and
> On the South by Quirino Highway, Mindanao Avenue."
>
> (2) Barangay Greater Lagro
>
> "Bounded on the North by Quirino Highway;
> On the East by the MWSS Reservoir;
>
> On the West by Belfast Street, Mindanao Avenue, Barangay Sta. Monica and Barangay Pasong Putik Boundary; and
> On the South by a creek, D.B.T. Marbay/Lagro Subdivision Boundary."
>
> (3) Barangay North Fairview
>
> "Bounded on the North by a creek, D.B.T. Marbay/Lagro Subdivision Boundary;
> On the East by Lagro Subdivision, Tullahan Creek;
> On the West by Barangay Sta. Monica and North Fairview Subdivision Boundary; and
> On the South by Barangay Fairview and Tullahan Creek."
>
> **Section 3.** *Conduct and Supervision of Plebiscite.* - The plebiscite conducted and supervised by the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) pursuant to Quezon City Ordinancce No. 439, series of 1996 of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Quezon City, which ratified the creation of Barangays Pasong Putik Proper, Barangay Greater Lagro and Barangay North Fairview as proclaimed by the Plebiscite Board of Canvassers on December 8, 1996 shall serve as substantial compliance with the plebiscite requirement under Section 10 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, as amended.
>
> **Section 4.** *Incumbent Barangay Officials.* - The incumbent barangay officials of Barangay Pasong Putik Proper, Greater Lagro and North Fairview shall continue to hold office until such time that their successors have been duly elected and qualified.7!ᕼdMᗄ7
>
> **Section 5.** *Public Infrastructure and Facilities.* - All public infrastructure and facilities for public use existing therein at the time of the approval of this Act shall continue to be owned and administered by the barangays herein created under Section 1 of this Act.
>
> **Section 6.** *National Tax Allotment Shares.* - Barangays Pasong Putik Proper, Greater Lagro and North Fairview shall be entitled to an allotment derived from national taxes pursuant to Section 285 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, as amended.
>
> **Section 7.** *Repealing Clause.* - All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with any provision of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.
>
> **Section 8.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on September 14, 2021, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 31, 2022, and which amendments was concurred in by the House of Representatives on February 2, 2022.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: Lapsed into law on JUN 02, 2022 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
