# Republic Act No. 11804

**AN ACT REAPPORTIONING THE PROVINCE OF SOUTH COTABATO INTO THREE (3) LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS, AND SEPARATING THE CITY OF GENERAL SANTOS FROM THE THIRD LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF THE PROVINCE OF SOUTH COTABATO TO CONSTITUTE THE LONE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF THE CITY OF GENERAL SANTOS, REPEALING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11243, ENTITLED "AN ACT REAPPORTIONING THE FIRST LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF THE PROVINCE OF SOUTH COTABATO THEREBY CREATING THE LONE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF GENERAL SANTOS CITY**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11804
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11804_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11804, June 02, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT REAPPORTIONING THE PROVINCE OF SOUTH COTABATO INTO THREE (3) LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS, AND SEPARATING THE CITY OF GENERAL SANTOS FROM THE THIRD LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF THE PROVINCE OF SOUTH COTABATO TO CONSTITUTE THE LONE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF THE CITY OF GENERAL SANTOS, REPEALING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11243, ENTITLED "AN ACT REAPPORTIONING THE FIRST LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF THE PROVINCE OF SOUTH COTABATO THEREBY CREATING THE LONE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF GENERAL SANTOS CITY**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The province of South Cotabato is hereby reapportioned into three (3) legislative districts to take effect in the 2025 national and local elections.
>
> (a) The Fist Legislative District shall be composed of the municipalities of Polomolok, Tampakan and Tupi;
>
> (b) The Second Legislative District shall be composed of the City of Koronadal, and the municipalities of Banga and Tantagan; and
>
> (c) The Third Legislative District shall be composed of the municipalities of Norala, Santo Niño, Surallah, Lake Sebu and T'boli.
>
> **Section 2.** The City of General Santos is hereby separated from the Third Legislative District of the Province of South Cotabato to constitute the Lone Legislative District of the City of General Santos.
>
> **Section 3.** The incumbent Representatives of the existing First and Second Districts of the Province of South Cotabato shall continue to represent the districts until the expiration of their term of office.
>
> **Section 4.** The Commission on Elections (COMELEC) shall issue the necessary implementing rules and regulations within thirty (30) days after the effectivity of this Act.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 5.** Republic Act No. 11243 is hereby repealed. All other laws, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALLAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on September 15, 2021, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 31, 2022, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on February 2, 2022.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: Lapsed into law on JUN 02 2022 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
