# Republic Act No. 11736

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MULTI-SPECIES MARINE HATCHERY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BASILISA, PROVINCE OF DINAGAT ISLANDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11736
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11736_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11736, April 27, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MULTI-SPECIES MARINE HATCHERY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BASILISA, PROVINCE OF DINAGAT ISLANDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established, under the supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a  multi-species marine hatchery in the Municipality of Basilisa, Province of Dinagat Islands.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 2.** The BFAR-DA shall transfer the management of the multi-species marine hatchery to the local government of Basilisa, within two (2) years after its construction through a memorandum of agreement. The BFAR-DA shall implement a training and phasing-in program for the personnel of the local government unit concerned on the management and operation of the  multi-species marine hatchery.
>
> The BFAR-DA  shall conduct continuing research and experimentation on the breeding and production of marine species, especially as they apply to local conditions, to discover new methods and strategy that shall benefit the fisheries industry.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the Department's programs the establishment of the  multi-species marine hatchery in the Municipality of Basilisa, Province of Dinagat Islands, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act. The local government unit concerned shall set aside funds from any available revenue in an amount deemed appropriate for the operationalization of the hatchery.
>
> **Section 4.** Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture  shall issue the rules and regulations on the  supervision, operation, monitoring, and the eventual transfer of the management of the  multi-species marine hatchery to the local government of Basilisa.
>
> **Section 5.** The Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALLAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on August 3, 2021 and January 31, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: APR 27 2022
>
> (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
