# Republic Act No. 11501

**AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE QUIRINO MEMORIAL MEDICAL CENTER IN QUEZON CITY, METRO MANILA FROM FIVE HUNDRED (500) BED TO ONE THOUSAND (1,000) BED, UPGRADING ITS PROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND FACILITIES, AUTHORIZING THE INCREASE OF ITS MEDICAL PERSONNEL COMPLEMENT AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11501
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2020/ra_11501_2020.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand twenty.
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11501, November 13, 2020 ]**
>
> **AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE QUIRINO MEMORIAL MEDICAL CENTER IN QUEZON CITY, METRO MANILA FROM FIVE HUNDRED (500) BED TO ONE THOUSAND (1,000) BED, UPGRADING ITS PROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND FACILITIES, AUTHORIZING THE INCREASE OF ITS MEDICAL PERSONNEL COMPLEMENT AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The authorized bed capacity of the Quirino Memorial Medical Center (QMMC) in Quezon City, Metro Manila, is hereby increased from five hundred (500) beds to one thousand (1,000) beds. The Secretary of the Department of Health (DOH) shall implement the increase in bed capacity of the QMMC consistent with a hospital development plan that shall be prepared by the Medical Center Chief of the QMMC to reflect the developmental goals of the hospital and submitted to the DOH.
>
> **Section 2.** The existing professional health care services and facilities of the QMMC are also hereby upgraded to conform with and be commensurate to the increase in bed capacity as provided for in Section 1 hereof, consistent with the hospital development plan.
>
> **Section 3.** The existing workforce of the QMMC shall be correspondingly increased correspondingly, consistent with the hospital development plan. The Secretary of the DOH shall, in coordination with the Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management and the Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission, and after consultation with the Medical Center Chief of the QMMC, determine the additional plantilla positions to be created and filled up.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of Health shall immediately include in the program of the DOH the implementation of this Act, funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.**If any provisions or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 6.** All other laws, decrees, executive orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 7.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette or in any newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **ALAN PETER S. CAYETANO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which was originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on May 6, 2020, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on July 28, 2020, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on August 26, 2020.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **JOSE LUIS G. MONTALES** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: NOV 13 2020
>
> (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
