# Republic Act No. 11728

**AN ACT COMMEMORATING THE CITYHOOD OF SAN JOSE DEL MONTE, PROVINCE OF BULACAN THROUGH THE ANNUAL CELEBRATION OF THE TANGLAWAN FESTIVAL ON THE OCCASION OF ITS FOUNDATION DAY IN SEPTEMBER 10, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9750**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11728
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11728_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11728, April 29, 2022 ]**
>
> AN ACT COMMEMORATING THE CITYHOOD OF SAN JOSE DEL MONTE, PROVINCE OF BULACAN THROUGH THE ANNUAL CELEBRATION OF THE TANGLAWAN FESTIVAL ON THE OCCASION OF ITS FOUNDATION DAY IN SEPTEMBER 10, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9750
>
> By it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 1 of Republic Act No. 9750 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 1.** September 10 of every year is hereby declared a special nonworking holiday in the City of San Jose del Monte, Province of Bulacan in commemoration of its cityhood. It shall be known as the 'Foundation Day of the City of San Jose del Monte' and shall be celebrated annually through the Tanglawan Festival".
>
> **Section 2.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.1aшphi1
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **LORD ALLAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on March 9, 2020 and January 31, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: APR 29 2022
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
