# Republic Act No. 11704

**AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF DR. PAULINO J. GARCIA MEMORIAL RESEARCH AND MEDICAL CENTER IN THE CITY OF CABANATUAN, PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA FROM FOUR HUNDRED (400) TO ONE THOUSAND (1,000) BEDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11704
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11704_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11704, April 16, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF DR. PAULINO J. GARCIA MEMORIAL RESEARCH AND MEDICAL CENTER IN THE CITY OF CABANATUAN, PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA FROM FOUR HUNDRED (400) TO ONE THOUSAND (1,000) BEDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The bed capacity of the Dr. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center (PJGMRMC) shall be increased from four hundred (400) to one thousand (1,000) beds. Any future increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the hospital development plan which shall be prepared by the Department of Health (DOH).
>
> **Section 2.** The existing professional health care services and facilities of the PJGMRMC are also hereby upgraded to conform with and be commensurate to the increase in bed capacity as provided for in Section 1 hereof.
>
> **Section 3.** The existing workforce of the PJGMRMC, which includes doctors, nurses, and support personnel, shall also be increased correspondingly.ℒαwρhi৷ The Secretary of the DOH shall, after consultation with the Chief of the PJGMRMC, and in coordination with the Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management and the Commissioner of the Civil Service Commission, determine the additional new positions to be created and filled up.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of the DOH shall immediately include in the Department's program the implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** If any provision or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 6.** All laws, executive orders, issuances, and rules and regulations inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 7.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALLAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on January 20, 2021 and January 31, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: APR 16 2022
>
> (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
