# Republic Act No. 11793

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE RODOLFO V. PAMOR, JR. MEMORIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - SAGÑAY SOUTHEASTERN HIGH SCHOOL ANNEX IN BARANGAY TURAGUE, MUNICIPALITY OF SAGÑAY, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR FROM THE RODOLFO V. PAMOR, JR. MEMORIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOO, CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE TURAGUE NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11793
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11793_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11793, May 29, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT SEPARATING THE RODOLFO V. PAMOR, JR. MEMORIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - SAGÑAY SOUTHEASTERN HIGH SCHOOL ANNEX IN BARANGAY TURAGUE, MUNICIPALITY OF SAGÑAY, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR FROM THE RODOLFO V. PAMOR, JR. MEMORIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOO, CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE TURAGUE NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Rodolfo V. Pamor, Jr. Memorial National High School - Sagñay Southeastern High School Annex in Barangay Turague. Municipality of Sagñay, Province of Camarines Sur is hereby separated from the Rodolfo V. Pamor, Jr. Memorial National High School and converted into an independent national high school to be known as Turague National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Rodolfo V. Pamor, Jr. Memorial National High School - Sagñay Southeastern High School Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Turague National High School.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department's program the operationalization of the Turague National High School, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year's appropriation of the Rodolfo V. Pamor, Jr. Memorial National High School - Sagñay Southeastern High School Annex. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation of the school shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** Within sixty (60) days after the approval of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall promulgate the rules and regulations implementing the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALLAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on September 22, 2021 and January 31, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: Lapsed into law on MAY 29 2022 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
