# Republic Act No. 11851

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE LAND TRANSPORATION OFFICE (LTO) EXTENSION OFFICE LOCATED IN MANDALUYONG CITY INTO A REGULAR LTO DISTRICT OFFICE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11851
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11851_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11851, June 18, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE LAND TRANSPORATION OFFICE (LTO) EXTENSION OFFICE LOCATED IN MANDALUYONG CITY INTO A REGULAR LTO DISTRICT OFFICE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The existing Land Transportation Office (LTO) Extension Office located in Mandaluyong City is hereby converted into a regular LTO district office.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of the Department of Transportation shall immediately include in the Department’s program the operationalization of a regular LTO district office in Mandaluyong City, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s appropriation of the LTO Extension Office located in Mandaluyong City. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued operation of the regular LTO district office shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of the Department of Transportation shall issue such rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on November 4, 2019 and January 31, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: Lapsed into law on JUN 18 2022 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article Section 27(1) of the Constitution.
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
