# Republic Act No. 11986

**AN ACT CREATING A BARANGAY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAROBO, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUR, TO BE KNOWN AS BARANGAY GUINHALINAN**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11986
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2024/ra_11986_2024.html)

---

> Nineteenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11986, March 21, 2024 ]**
>
> AN ACT CREATING A BARANGAY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAROBO, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUR, TO BE KNOWN AS BARANGAY GUINHALINAN
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** *Creation of Barangay Guinhalinan.* - There is hereby created a barangay in the Municipality of Barobo, Province of Surigao del Sur, to be known as Barangay Guinhalinan.
>
> **Section 2.** *Territorial Boundaries.* - The territorial boundaries of Barangay Guihalinan shall be described as follows:
>
> > Boundaries:
> >
> > |  |  |  |  |
> > | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> > | Line | Direction | Adjoining Lots/Features |  |
> > | 1-2-3-4-5-6 | NW & NE | BARANGAY JAVIER, CASE 10-B |  |
> > | 6-7 | SE | BARANGAY BATUNAN |  |
> > | 7-8-9 | SE & SW | SORLANO, JAVIER VS. JAVIER, BAROBO |  |
> > | 9-10 | SW | MUNICIPALITY OF SAN FRANCISCO |  |
> > | 10-1 | NE | BARANGAY JAVIER, CASE 10-B |  |
> >
> > Tie Point: SRS-56
> >
> > Lot Description
> >
> > |  |  |  |  |
> > | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> > | Line | Bearing | Distance |  |
> > | Tie Point-1 | S 46 01' W | 10,219.92 m. |  |
> > | 1-2 | N 72 42' E | 125.40 m. |  |
> > | 2-3 | N 27 19' E | 1,599.58 m. |  |
> > | 3-4 | S 69 12' E | 1,515.29 m. |  |
> > | 4-5 | S 78 28' E | 2,545.85 m. |  |
> > | 5-6 | S 67 04 E | 1,495.91 m. |  |
> > | 6-7 | S 30 22' W | 1,189.55 m. |  |
> > | 7-8 | S 63 41' W | 2,166.59 m. |  |
> > |£A⩊phi£ 8-9 | N 87 40' W | 3,668.23 m. |  |
> > | 9-10 | N 30 23' W | 2,828.00 m. |  |
> > | 10-1 | S 73 56' E | 1,557.18 m. |  |
> >
> > Area: Sixteen million eight hundred twenty thousand one hundred one (16,820,101) square meters, more or less;
> >
> > Description of Corners: Points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 are frustum concrete monument with a dimension of top cross section 20 x 20 cmx. x 100 cms.;
>
> **Section 3.** *Conduct and Supervision of Plebiscite.* - The Commission on Elections (COMELEC) shall conduct and supervise the plebiscite to be held in Barangay Guinhalinan, Barobo, Surigao del Sur, within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act. The Municipality of Barobo shall shoulder the expenses for such plebiscite.
>
> **Section 4.** *Appointment of Interim Barangay Officials.* - There shall be a Punong Barangay, seven (7) Sangguninang Barangay members, a Sangguniang Kabataan chairman, and seven (7) Sangguniang Kabataan members in the newly created barangay which shall be appointed by the Mayor. Such barangay officials shall serve until their successors shall have been duly elected and qualified.
>
> **Section 5.** *Public Infrastructures and Facilities.* - All public infrastructures and facilities existing therein at the time of the approval of this Act are hereby transferred without cost or compensation to and shall be administered by the new barangay.
>
> **Section 6.** *National Tax Allotment Shares.* - Barangay Guinhalinan shall be entitled to National Tax Allotment shares pursuant to Section 285 of the Local Government Code of 1991, as amended.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 7.** *Repealing Clause.* - All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules, and regulations which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 8.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **JUAN MIGUEL F. ZUBIRI** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives, was passed by the House of Representatives on September 26, 2022, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on December 11, 2023, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on December 13, 2023.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **RENATO N. BANTUG, JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **REGINALD S. VELASCO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: MAR 21 2024
>
> **FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
