# Republic Act No. 11752

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A REGULAR CAMPUS OF THE NUEVA ECIJA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (NEUST) IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STO. DOMINGO, PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA, TO BE KNOWN AS THE NEUST-STO. DOMINGO CAMPUS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11752
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11752_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11752, April 27, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT ESTABLISHING A REGULAR CAMPUS OF THE NUEVA ECIJA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (NEUST) IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STO. DOMINGO, PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA, TO BE KNOWN AS THE NEUST-STO. DOMINGO CAMPUS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** This Act shall be known as the ***"Nueva Ecija University of Science and Technology-Sto. Domingo Campus Act".***
>
> **Section 2.** There are hereby established a campus of the Nueva Ecija University of Science and Technology, hereinafter referred to as the University in the Municipality of Sto. Domingo, Province of Nueva Ecija, to be known as the Nueva Ecija University of Science and Technology (NEUST)-Sto. Domingo Campus.
>
> **Section 3.** The NEUST-Sto. Domingo Campus shall primarily provide short-term, technical-vocational, undergraduate, and graduate courses within its areas of competency and specialization, pursuant to its mandate, and according to its capabilities as the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the Board, may deem necessary to carry out its objectives, and those which respond to the human resources development needs of the Province of Nueva Ecija and Region III.
>
> The NEUST-Sto. Domingo Campus is also mandated to undertake research and extension services, and to provide progressive leadership in these areas.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 4.** The NEUST-Sto. Domingo Campus shall be headed by a Campus Administrator who shall render full-time service and shall be appointed or designated by the Board upon the recommendation of the search committee and the President of the University. Such appointment or designation shall be subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board.
>
> **Section 5.** The establishment of the NEUST-Sto. Domingo Campus shall ensure that the minimum requirements for its operation and program offerings have been complied with, as duly prescribed by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED).
>
> **Section 6.** All assets, real and personal, personnel. and records of the NEUST-Sto. Domingo Campus, as well as liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred to the University. The positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members and personnel employed at the NEUST-Sto. Domingo Campus under existing laws prior to the integration to the University shall be respected.
>
> All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied by the NEUST-Sto. Domingo Campus are hereby declared to be property of the University and shall be titled under under its name: *Provided,* That should the University cease to exist or be abolished or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by the University, the same shall revert to the concerned local government unit or to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.
>
> **Section 7.** The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the "Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997," shall form an integral part of this Act, and together, shall serve as the governing charter of the University.
>
> **Section 8.** All other powers, functions, privileges, responsibilities, and limitations to state universities and their officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted to or imposed upon the University and its officials, whenever appropriate.
>
> **Section 9.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 10.** If, for any reason, any part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 11.** All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 12.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALLAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on August 11, 2020 and January 17, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:  APR 27 2022
>
> (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
