# Republic Act No. 11873

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DON MARCELINO, PROVINCE OF DAVAO OCCIDENTAL, A COMMUNITY HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS THE LAMIDAN COMMUNITY HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11873
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2022/ra_11873_2022.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand twenty one.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11873, June 29, 2022 ]**
>
> **AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DON MARCELINO, PROVINCE OF DAVAO OCCIDENTAL, A COMMUNITY HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS THE LAMIDAN COMMUNITY HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established in the Municipality of Don Marcelino. Province of Davao Occidental, a community hospital to be known as the Lamidan Community Hospital, which shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Provincial Government of Davao Occidental.
>
> **Section 2.** The Provincial Government of Davao Occidental shall manage the Lamidan Community Hospital, and prepare, in consultation with the Department of Health (DOH), a hospital development plan that is aligned with the Philippine Health Facility Development Plan. Any future increase in bed capacity, health care facilities, service capability, and human resources complement shall be based on the hospital development plan.
>
> **Section 3.** The Provincial Government of Davao Occidental shall provide the necessary funds for the establishment of the Lamidan Community Hospital.+3u.7!ydmb7 The Secretary of the DOH shall include in the Department’s subsidy program, support for the capital outlay requirements of the Lamidan Community Hospital.
>
> **Section 4.** If any provision or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 5.** All laws, executive orders, issuances, rules and regulations inconsistent with this Act are hereby modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> ||  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **LORD ALAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on March 17, 2021 and May 31, 2022, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: JUN 29 2022
>
> (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
