# Republic Act No. 11546

**AN ACT REAPPORTIONING THE PROVINCE OF BULACAN INTO SIX (6) LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11546
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2021/ra_11546_2021.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand twenty.
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11546, May 26, 2021 ]**
>
> **AN ACT REAPPORTIONING THE PROVINCE OF BULACAN INTO SIX (6) LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Province of Bulacan is hereby reapportioned into six (6) legislative districts to take effect in the 2022 national and local elections. Each legislative district of the province shall now be composed of the following:
>
> (a) The First Legislative District
>
> (1) Calumpit;
>
> (2) Hagonoy;
>
> (3) Paombong;
>
> (4) Pulilan;
>
> (5) Bulakan; and
>
> (6) City of Malolos.
>
> (b) Second Legislative District
>
> (1) Baliuag;
>
> (2) Bustos; and
>
> (3) Plaridel.
>
> (c) Third Legislative District
>
> (1) San Ildefonso;
>
> (2) San Miguel;
>
> (3) San Rafarel; and
>
> (4) Doña Remedios Trinidad.
>
> (d) Fourth Legislative District
>
> (1) Obando;
>
> (2) Marilao; and
>
> (3) City of Meycauayan.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> (e) Fifth Legislative District
>
> (1) Guiguinto;
>
> (2) Balagtas;
>
> (3) Pandi; and
>
> (4) Bocaue.
>
> (f) Sixth Legislative District
>
> (1) Sta. Maria;
>
> (2) Norzagaray; and
>
> (3) Angat.
>
> **Section 2.** All the incumbent Representatives of the Province of Bulacan shall continue to hold office until the expiration of their terms of office.
>
> **Section 3.** The Commission on Elections (COMELEC) shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) day after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **LORD ALLAN JAY Q. VELASCO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on August 11, 2020 and March 9, 2021, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **MARK LLANDRO L. MENDOZA** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: MAY 26 2021
>
> |  |
> | --- |
> | (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE** President of the Philippines |
>
>
>
