# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 610

**TRANSFERRING TO THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OVER THE BUDGETARY REQUIREMENTS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 610
- **Date**: March 13, 2007
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2007/eo_610_2007.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 610, March 13, 2007 ]
>
> TRANSFERRING TO THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OVER THE BUDGETARY REQUIREMENTS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM
>
> WHEREAS, Section 3 of Republic Act No. 8492 placed the National Museum under the Office of the President (OP) solely for budgetary purposes;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution provides that the President shall have control of all executive departments, bureaus and offices and shall ensure that all laws be faithfully executed;
>
> **WHEREAS,** paragraph 2, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of Executive Order No. 292 grants the President the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President and the power to transfer any function under the Office of the President to any other Department;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Department of Education can best perform the responsibility mandated by Republic Act No. 8492 with respect to the budgetary requirements of the National Museum considering that it used to be an independent unit under the said Department;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** *Transfer to the Department of Education.*  The responsibility of the Office of the President under Section 3 of Republic Act No. 8492 over the budgetary requirements of the national Museum is hereby transferred to the Department of Education.
>
> **Section 2.** *Effectivity.*  This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of March in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA M. ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
