# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 607

**CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE ACCOUNT**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 607
- **Date**: March 05, 2007
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2007/eo_607_2007.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 607, March 05, 2007 ]
>
> CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE ACCOUNT
>
> WHEREAS, the Philippines, a Threshold Country, has yet to qualify as a Compact Eligible Country to avail of the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) Assistance.
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to demonstrate our country's commitment to meeting the MCA eligibility requirements.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** *Task Force MCA.* There is hereby created an inter-agency task force hereinafter referred to as Task Force MCA, which shall be attached to the Department of Finance.
>
> **Section 2.** *Composition.* The Task Force shall be charged by the Secretary, Department of Finance, with the Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs and the Director General of the National Economic and Development Authority as Members.
>
> **Section 3.** *Mandate.*  Task Force MCA shall endeavor to meet the essential requirement to make the Philippines qualify as a compact eligible country.
>
> **Section 4.** *Powers and Functions.*  The Task Force MCA shall have, among others, the following functions:
>
> a.) Provide third-party sources used by the millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) with correct, updated data on the Philippines.
>
> b.) Develop proper reporting systems and formats as required by third-party.
>
> c.) Perform such other powers and functions as may be necessary or incidental to its mandate.
>
> **Section 5.** *Secretariat.*  The Secretary of Finance may designate such officials or employees as he deemed necessary to function as the Secretariat for the Task Force.
>
> **Section 6.** *Funding.*  Funding for the task force may be sourced from available funds of DOF and DFA, subject to existing accounting and auditing laws and procedures.
>
> **Section 7.** *Separability Clause.* If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid, the remainder thereof shall not be affected thereby.
>
> **Section 8.** *Repealing Clause.* All laws, decrees and orders or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are deemed repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 9.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect immediately following its publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA M. ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
