# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 657

**AMENDING <b>Section </b>1 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 480 DATED 27 DECEMBER 2005**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 657
- **Date**: August 28, 2007
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2007/eo_657_2007.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 657, August 28, 2007 ]
>
> AMENDING Section 1 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 480 DATED 27 DECEMBER 2005
>
> WHEREAS, the Presidential Anti-Organized Crime Commission (PAOCC) was created under the Office of the President to bring about focus and substantive results in the campaign of the Government against criminality;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the membership of the PAOCC had been updated several times to meet the exigencies of changing times, the latest of which was by virtue of Executive Order No. 480 (s. 2005);
>
> **WHEREAS,** enhanced coordination between the Government and the private sector is important in the fight against criminality;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Administrative Code of 1987 empowers the President with the continuing authority to reorganize the Office of the President;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Amendment of Section 1 of Executive Order No. 480 (s. 2005). - Section 1 of Executive Order No. 480 (s. 2005) is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "The Presidential Anti-Organized Crime Commission shall not be composed of the following:
> >
> > The President Chairman
> >
> > The Secretary of the Interior and Local Government Vice-Chairman
> >
> > The National Security Adviser Member
> >
> > The Secretary of Justice Member
> >
> > The Secretary of National Defense Member
> >
> > The Secretary of Transportation and Communications Member
> >
> > The Secretary of Foreign Affairs Member
> >
> > Four (4) representatives from the Private Sector to be appointed by the President Member
> >
> > The President may designate a Co-Vice-Chairman from among the members representing the private sector."
>
> **Section 2.** *Repealing Clause.* - All executive issuances or portions thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly
>
> **Section 3.** *Effectivity.* - This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA M. ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
