# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 653

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NOS. 380 AND 380-A, SERIES OF 2004 AND 2006, RESPECTIVELY**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 653
- **Date**: August 09, 2007
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2007/eo_653_2007.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 653, August 09, 2007 ]
>
> AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NOS. 380 AND 380-A, SERIES OF 2004 AND 2006, RESPECTIVELY
>
> WHEREAS, Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1084 created the Public Estates Authority (PEA);
>
> **WHEREAS,** Executive Order (EO) No. 380 dated October 26, 2004 transformed the PEA into the Philippine Reclamation Authority (PRA), with the non-reclamation assets and liabilities transferred tot eh Department of Finance (DOF);
>
> **WHEREAS,** EO no. 380-A dated April 3, 2006 clarified certain provisions of EO No. 380 (2004), whereby only non-reclamation assets were to be transferred to the National Government;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the agreement of PRA with DOF to convey to the latter a 62-hectare reclaimed land in Central Business Park I - Islands B & C (CBP-IBC) in Paranaque City in exchange for the DOF’s assumption of PRA's liabilities never materialized;
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is need to clarify further what reclamation assets should be retained by PRA;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR) is interested in acquiring 40-hectares of the CBP-IBC property, and PRA has reserved such portion to PAGCOR by way of a Memorandum of Understanding dated May 19, 2006.
>
> **WHEREAS,** the amendment of Section 3 of EO Nos. 380 and 380-A, series of 2004 and 2006, respectively, is necessary.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 3 of Executive Order No. 380 dated October 26, 2004 and Section 3 of Executive Order No. 380-A dated April 3, 2006 are hereby amended as follows:
>
> > "Section 3. The reclamation assets to be retained by PRA shall include all its existing reclaimed lands, whether fully reclaimed or not, developed or undeveloped; all those lands to be reclaimed; all the horizontal and vertical improvements and buildings on reclaimed lands; all the funds derived from disposition or use of reclaimed lands; all other properties acquired by PRA through the proceeds/income of reclaimed lands and reclamation undertakings; and proceeds/income of all PRA properties acquired from the preceding reclamation assets.
> >
> > It is hereby understood that no liability shall be transferred to the National Government."
>
> **Section 2.** All executive orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby revoked, amended, or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 3.** This Executive Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 9th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA M. ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
