# Republic Act No. 12103

**AN ACT DECLARING APRIL 16 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL NONWORKING HOLIDAY IN THE CITY OF MARIKINA, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10788, ENTITLED "AN ACT DECLARING APRIL 16 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL HOLIDAY AND NO CLASS IN SCHOOLS IN THE CITY OF MARIKINA IN COMMEMORATION OF ITS FOUNDING ANNIVERSARY TO BE KNOWN AS "MARIKINA CITY DAY"**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 12103
- **Date Signed**: December 13, 2024
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2024/ra_12103_2024.html)

---

> Nineteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> [ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 12103, December 13, 2024 ]
>
> AN ACT DECLARING APRIL 16 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL NONWORKING HOLIDAY IN THE CITY OF MARIKINA, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10788, ENTITLED "AN ACT DECLARING APRIL 16 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL HOLIDAY AND NO CLASS IN SCHOOLS IN THE CITY OF MARIKINA IN COMMEMORATION OF ITS FOUNDING ANNIVERSARY TO BE KNOWN AS "MARIKINA CITY DAY"
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 1 of Republic Act No. 10788 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 1.** April 16 of every year is hereby declared a special nonworking holiday in the City of Marikina in commemoration of its founding anniversary to be known as "Marikina City Day". If the day falls on a school day, classes at all levels in all schools in Marikina City shall be suspended."
>
> **Section 2.** Section 2 of the same Act is hereby repealed.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANCIS "CHIZ" G. ESCUDERO** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives, was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on September 5, 2022 and August 27, 2024, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **RENATO N. BANTUG, JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **REGINALD S. VELASCO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: DEC 13 2024
>
> (Sgd.) **FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
