# Republic Act No. 12175

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SANTO TOMAS, PROVINCE OF DAVAO DEL NORTE, A MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS THE SANTO TOMAS MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 12175
- **Date Signed**: April 15, 2025
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2025/ra_12175_2025.html)

---

> [ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 12175, April 15, 2025 ]
>
> AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SANTO TOMAS, PROVINCE OF DAVAO DEL NORTE, A MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS THE SANTO TOMAS MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established in the Municipality of Santo Tomas, Province of Davao del Norte, a municipal hospital to be known as the Santo Tomas Municipal Hospital, which shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Provincial Government of Davao del Norte.
>
> **Section 2.** Any future increase in bed capacity, healthcare facilities, service capability, and human resource complement shall be based on the hospital development plan that shall be prepared by the Chief of Hospital, in consultation with the Department of Health.
>
> **Section 3.** The Provincial Government of Davao del Norte shall provide for the necessary funds for the establishment of the Santo Tomas Municipal Hospital.ℒαwρhi৷ The Secretary of Health shall include in the Department's subsidy program, support for the capital outlay requirements of the said hospital.
>
> **Section 4.** If any provision or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 5.** All laws, executive orders, issuances, and rules and regulations inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **FRANCIS "CHIZ" G. ESCUDERO** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act, which is originated in the House of Representatives, was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on May 21, 2024 and February 3, 2025, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **RENATO N. BANTUG, JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **REGINALD S. VELASCO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: APR 15 2025
>
> (SGD.) **FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
