# Republic Act No. 12070

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE CITY OF VICTORIAS, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, A GENERAL HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS THE VICTORIAS CITY GENERAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 12070
- **Date Signed**: November 08, 2024
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2024/ra_12070_2024.html)

---

> [ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 12070, November 08, 2024 ]
>
> AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE CITY OF VICTORIAS, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, A GENERAL HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS THE VICTORIAS CITY GENERAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established in the City of Victorias, Province of Negros Occidental, a general hospital to be known as the Victorias City General Hospital, which shall be under the direct control and supervision of the City Government of Victorias.
>
> **Section 2.** The City Government of Victorias shall manage the Victorias City General Hospital, and prepare, in consultation with the Department of Health, a hospital development plan that is aligned with the Philippine Health Facility Development Plan. Any future increase in bed capacity, healthcare facilities, service capability, and human resource complement shall be based on the hospital development plan.
>
> **Section 3.** The City Government of Victorias shall provide the necessary funds for the establishment of the Victorias City General Hospital.ℒαwρhi৷ The Secretary of Health shall include in the Department's subsidy program, support for the capital outlay requirements of the Victorias City General Hospital.
>
> **Section 4.** If any provision or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 5.** All laws, executive orders, issuances and rules and regulations inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette or in a national newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANCIS "CHIZ" G. ESCUDERO** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives, was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on August 9, 2023 and August 19, 2024, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **RENATO N. BANTUG, JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **REGINALD S. VELASCO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: NOV 08 2024
>
> (Sgd.) **FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
