# Republic Act No. 12122

**AN ACT FIXING THE TERM OF OFFICE OF THE PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD COMMANDANT AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 12122
- **Date Signed**: February 18, 2025
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2025/ra_12122_2025.html)

---

> [ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 12122, February 18, 2025 ]
>
> AN ACT FIXING THE TERM OF OFFICE OF THE PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD COMMANDANT AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 5 of Republic Act No. 9993 or the "Philippine Coast Guard Law of 2009" is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 5.** *The PCG Commandant.* - The PCG shall be headed by a Commandant who shall carry the rank of Coast Guard Admiral: *Provided,* That, he or she shall be appointed by the President from among the Flag Officers in the Coast Guard service. He or she shall hold a command-at-sea badge and must have served as a District Commander of the PCG. The Commandant shall have a maximum term of three (3) years, which shall commence on the date of the appointment is signed, unless sooner terminated by the President. The PCG Commander shall be compulsorily retired upon completion of the maximum term or upon relief by the President."
>
> **Section 2.** *Application.* - The provisions of this Act shall also apply to the PCG Commandant appointed and/or promoted under Republic Act No. 9993 and other pertinent laws.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** *Repealing Clause.* - All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **FRANCIS "CHIZ" G. ESCUDERO** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives, was passed by the House of Representatives on September 19, 2024, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 20, 2025, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on February 5, 2025.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **RENATO N. BANTUG, JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **REGINALD S. VELASCO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: FEB 18 2025
>
> (SGD.) **FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
