# Republic Act No. 12209

**AN ACT RATIONALIZING THE SAFETY MEASURES AND PENALTIES RELATIVE TO THE OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11235, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE "MOTORCYCLE CRIME PREVENTION ACT"**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 12209
- **Date Signed**: May 09, 2025
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2025/ra_12209_2025.html)

---

> [ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 12209, May 09, 2025 ]
>
> AN ACT RATIONALIZING THE SAFETY MEASURES AND PENALTIES RELATIVE TO THE OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11235, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE "MOTORCYCLE CRIME PREVENTION ACT"
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 4 of Republic Act No. 11235 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "**Section 4.** *Registration of Motorcycles.* - In the case of original sale, the dealer shall, upon authority of the owner, register the motorcycle with the LTO not later than five (5) working days from the date of sale.
> >
> > In the event of a subsequent sale or disposition, the owner into who sold or disposed of a motorcycle shall report such sale or disposition, in person or online, to the LTO not later than five (5) working) days from the date of transaction.
> >
> > The new owner shall cause the transfer of ownership of the motorcycle not later than twenty (20) working days from the acquisition of ownership. The LTO, upon the new owner's complete submission of documentary requirements, including the Philippine National Police-Highway Patrol Group (PNP-HPG) clearance, shall issue the corresponding Certificate of Registration within two (2) working days.
> >
> > In the case of a sale or disposition of a motorcycle through a dealership, there shall be a written agreement stating that the seller retains ownership but grants the buyer the right to use and possess the motorcycle until full payment of the purchase price.
> >
> > All dealers shall report each instance of repossession of a motorcycle to the LTO. The LTO shall revert the motorcycle registration to the name of the dealer and record it in its system as under storage to avoid incurring penalty.ℒαwρhi৷ Dealers shall submit to the LTO a yearly report on the status of all possessed motorcycles under their custody. For purposes of this Act, the term "dealer" includes those engaged in the business of "buy and sell".
> >
> > Failure of the dealer, original owner, or the new owner to comply with the requirements of this section shall subject the dealer, original owner, or the new owner to a fine of not more than Five thousand pesos (P5,000): *Provided,* That no seizure shall be made solely on the basis of the buyer's failure to comply with the requirements of this section."
>
> **Section 2.** Section 5 of Republic Act No. 11235 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 5.** *Bigger, Readable, and Color-Coded Number Plates.* - The LTO shall issue a bigger, readable, and color-coded number plate for every motorcycle, following the font style and size prescribed in the implementing rules and regulations (IRR) of this Act. The information on the number plates shall be readable from the back portion of the motorcycle at a distance of at least fifteen (15) meters from the motorcycle.
>
> x x x
>
> The readable number plates must be displayed at the back of a motorcycle and shall be made of suitable and durable material as determined by the LTO.
>
> x x x."
>
> **Section 3.** Section 7 of Republic Act No. 11235 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 7.** *Driving Without a Number Plat or Readable Number Plate.* - Driving without a number plate or a readable number plate, as provided in this Act, is prohibited. The driver of a motorcycle without a number plate or readable number plate shall be punished with a fine of not more than Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00).
>
> A motorcycle driver without a number plate or a readable number plate shall be stopped and seized by law enforcers, and immediately surrendered to the Philippine National Police (PNP): *Provided,* That no seizure shall be made upon showing proof of ownership and registration and that the owner is not at fault for the non-installation of a number plate or readable plate. Any apprehension must be reported immediately to the LTO, the PNP, and the Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT) through the Joint LTO and PNP Operations and Control Center. The owner of such motorcycle may redeem the seized motorcycle from the PNP with the required clearances from the LTO upon proof of ownership, payment of the costs of seizure, and compliance with the requirement for a number plate or readable number plate."
>
> **Section 4.** Section 11 of Republic Act No. 11235 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 11.** *Loss of Number Plate or Readable Number Plate.* - If the number plate or readable number plate of a motorcycle is lost, damaged, or stolen, the owner or possessor of such motorcycle shall report the same to the LTO and the PNP through the Joint PNP and LTO Operations and Control Center within seventy-two (72) hours from discovery of such loss or damage, and request a replacement number plate. Failure of the owner to report the same shall subject the owner to a fine of not more than Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00).
>
> If the lost, damaged, or stolen number plate or readable number plate is used in connection with an offense penalized under the Revised Penal Code or special penal laws, the failure of the owner to report within three (3) days that the motorcycle is lost, damaged, or stolen, shall subject the owner to a fine of not more than Ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00)."
>
> **Section 5.** Section 12 of Republic Act No. 11235 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 12.** *Erasing, Tampering, Forging, Imitating, Covering or Concealing a Number Plate or Readable Number Plate and Intentional Use Thereof.* -
>
> (a) Erasing, tampering, altering, forging, imitating, covering, or concealing a number plate or readable number plate, or intentionally using such erased, tampered, altered, forged, imitated, covered or concealed number plate or readable number plate shall be punished with imprisonment ranging from six (6) months and one (1) day to two (2) years, or a fine of not more than Ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00), or both;
>
> (b) If a person knowingly sells or buys an erased, tampered, altered, forged or imitated number plate or readable number plate, both buyer and seller shall be published with imprisonment ranging from six (6) months and one (1) day to two (2) years, or a fine of Ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00), or both."
>
> **Section 6.** Section 13 of Republic Act No. 11235 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 13.** Use of a Stolen Number Plate or Readable Number Plate. - Without prejudice to criminal prosecution for violation of existing laws, the use of a stolen number plate or readable number plate in a motorcycle shall be punished with a fine of not more than Twenty thousand pesos (P20,000.00)."
>
> **Section 7.** *Section 19 of Republic Act No.* 11235 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "**Section 19.** *Transitory Provision.* - Motorcycle owners with number plates not in conformity with the provisions of this Act shall renew their registration and apply for the required readable number plate not later than December 31, 2025. The LTO is given until June 30, 2026 to produce, release, and issue the number plates as required by this Act. After June 30, 2026, the penal provisions regarding the use of bigger, readable, and color-coded number plates as required under this Act shall take effect."
>
> **Section 8.** *Separability Clause.* - If any provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder thereof not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 9.** *Repealing Clause.* - All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations, or administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 10.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ** Speaker of the House of Representatives | (Sgd.) **FRANCIS "CHIZ" G. ESCUDERO** President of the Senate |
>
> This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2555 and House Bill No. 11113, was passed by the Senate of the Philippines and the House of Representatives on February 3, 2025 and February 5, 2025, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **REGINALD S. VELASCO** Secretary General House of Representatives | (Sgd.) **RENATO N. BANTUG, JR.** Secretary of the Senate |
>
> Approved: MAY 09 2025
>
> (Sgd.) **FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
