# Republic Act No. 12228

**AN ACT DECLARING THE SEVENTH DAY OF NOVEMBER OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL NATIONAL WORKING HOLIDAY IN COMMEMORATION O THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FIRST PHILIPPINE MOSQUE AND THE INTRODUCTION OF ISLAM IN THE PHILIPPINES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 12228
- **Date Signed**: July 09, 2025
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2025/ra_12228_2025.html)

---

> Nineteenth Congress
> First Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, two thousand twenty two.
>
> [ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 12228, July 09, 2025 ]
>
> AN ACT DECLARING THE SEVENTH DAY OF NOVEMBER OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL NATIONAL WORKING HOLIDAY IN COMMEMORATION O THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FIRST PHILIPPINE MOSQUE AND THE INTRODUCTION OF ISLAM IN THE PHILIPPINES
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** *Short Title.* - This Act shall be known as the "Sheikh Karum'ul Makhdum Day".
>
> **Section 2.** *Declaration of Policy.* - It is the policy of the State to instill inclusivity to all regardless of religious beliefs, in line with the constitutional right to freely exercise and enjoy their religion. Moreover, it is the State's policy to provide due recognition to the indispensable contribution of Muslim Filipinos in the development of Philippine culture and civilization.
>
> **Section 3.** *National Holiday.* - Every seventh (7th) day of November is hereby declared as "Sheikh Karim'ul Makhdum Day", a special national working holiday in commemoration of the establishment of the first Philippine Mosque, and the introduction of Islam in the Philippines.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> |  | (Sgd.) **FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ** Speaker of the House of Representatives | (Sgd.) **FRANCIS "CHIZ" G. ESCUDERO** President of the Senate |
>
> This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as Senate Bill No. 2252 on December 16, 2024 and adopted by the House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill No. 7479 on January 15, 2025.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **REGINALD S. VELASCO** Secretary General House of Representatives | (Sgd.) **RENATO N. BANTUG, JR.** Secretary of the Senate |
>
> Approved: JUL 09 2025
>
> (Sgd.) **FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
