# Republic Act No. 12093

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY SAN FRANCISCO, MUNICIPALITY OF STA. IGNACIA, PROVINCE OF TARLAC TO BE KNOWN AS THE STA. IGNACIA NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 12093
- **Date Signed**: December 13, 2024
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2024/ra_12093_2024.html)

---

> Nineteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> [ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 12093, December 13, 2024 ]
>
> AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY SAN FRANCISCO, MUNICIPALITY OF STA. IGNACIA, PROVINCE OF TARLAC TO BE KNOWN AS THE STA. IGNACIA NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There is hereby established, under the supervision of the Department of Education, a national high school in Barangay San Francisco, Municipality of Sta. Ignacia, Province of Tarlac to be known as the Sta. Ignacia National High School..
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department's program the operationalization of the Sta. Ignacia National High School, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** Within ninety (90) days from the approval of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall formulate the rules and regulations implementing the provisions of this Act. Such implementing rules and regulations shall provide for the school's organization, administration, operations and management, in accordance with Republic Act No. 9155, or the "Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001", Republic Act No. 10533, or the "Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013", and other basic education-related laws.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette or in a national newspaper of general circulation.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANCIS "CHIZ" G. ESCUDERO** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives, was passed by the House of Representatives on July 30, 2024, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on September 23, 2024, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on September 24, 2024.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **RENATO N. BANTUG, JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **REGINALD S. VELASCO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: DEC 13 2024
>
> (Sgd.) **FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
