# Republic Act No. 8724

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL SCIENCE HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BINANGONAN, PROVINCE OF RIZAL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE RIZAL NATIONAL SCIENCE HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8724
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8724_1998.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8724, July 26, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL SCIENCE HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BINANGONAN, PROVINCE OF RIZAL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE RIZAL NATIONAL SCIENCE HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established a national science high school in the Municipality of Binangonan, Province of Rizal, to be known as the Rizal National Science High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The science high school shall primarily provide the science and technology training as may be authorized by the Department of Education, Culture and orts, in coordination with the Department of Science and Technology, and consistent with the goals for local, regional and national development.
>
> **Section 3.** The science high school shall be under the direct supervision of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, in coordination with the Department of Science and Technology.  These departments shall likewise issue the rules and regulations necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 19, 1998 and November 17, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on July 26, 1998, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
