# Republic Act No. 8905

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE COTABATO CITY NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - DATU AYUNAN ANNEX IN COTABATO CITY FROM THE COTABATO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND CONVERTING THE SAME INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE DATU AYUNAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8905
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2000/ra_8905_2000.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8905, August 22, 2000 ]**
>
> **AN ACT SEPARATING THE COTABATO CITY NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - DATU AYUNAN ANNEX IN COTABATO CITY FROM THE COTABATO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND CONVERTING THE SAME INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE DATU AYUNAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Cotabato City National High School -Datu Ayunan Annex in Cotabato City is hereby separated from the Cotabato City National High School and converted into an independent national high school to be known as the Datu Ayunan National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The amount necessary for the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriation of the Cotabato City National High School - Datu Ayunan Annex. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continuous operation and maintenance of the Datu Ayunan National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, records, assets and liabilities of the Cotabato City National High School - Datu Ayunan Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Datu Ayunan National High School.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect immediately upon its approval.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> Approved, August 22, 2000.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of Senate | (Sgd.) **MANUEL B. VILLAR JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 17, 1999 and May 22, 2000, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: August 22, 2000
>
> (Sgd.) **JOSEPH E. ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
