# Republic Act No. 8596

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE NEW LUCENA COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF NEW LUCENA, PROVINCE OF ILOILO, INTO A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE NEW LUCENA POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8596
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8596_1998.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8596, March 18, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE NEW LUCENA COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF NEW LUCENA, PROVINCE OF ILOILO, INTO A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE NEW LUCENA POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The New Lucena Community College in the Municipality of New Lucena, Province of Iloilo, is hereby converted into a polytechnic college to be known as the New Lucena Polytechnic College.
>
> **Section 2.** The College shall offer such courses in health care and other related programs as may be authorized by the Director- General of the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA).
>
> **Section 3.** The assets, liabilities, personnel, equipment and records of the New Lucena Community College shall be transferred to the New Lucena Polytechnic College.
>
> **Section 4.** The Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) shall take steps as are necessary for the conversion and operation of the school and the immediate implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **NEPTALI A. GONZALES** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 26, 1998 and December 8, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: March 18, 1998.
>
> (Sgd.) **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
