# Republic Act No. 8581

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE VICENTE V. ANDAYA, SR. NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SIGMA, PROVINCE OF CAPIZ, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREOF**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8581
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8581_1998.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8581, February 28, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE VICENTE V. ANDAYA, SR. NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SIGMA, PROVINCE OF CAPIZ, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREOF**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established, under the supervision of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, a national high school in the Municipality of Sigma, Province of Capiz, to be known as the Vicente V. Andaya, Sr. National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports shall take the necessary steps for the establishment of the school so as to make it operational during the first school term after the effectivity of this Act.
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.Ꮮαwρhi৷
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 22, 1997 and November 24, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on February 28, 1998 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
