# Republic Act No. 8825

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE CALACCAD BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF TABUK, PROVINCE OF KALINGA, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE CALACCAD NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8825
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2000/ra_8825_2000.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8825, August 22, 2000 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE CALACCAD BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF TABUK, PROVINCE OF KALINGA, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE CALACCAD NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Calaccad Barangay High School in the Municipality of Tabuk, Province of Kalinga, is hereby converted into a national high school, to be known as the Calaccad National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The school will offer secondary education proper, as well as secondary science courses to carry out its objectives and such courses as may be authorized by the Secretary of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Calaccad Barangay High School are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Calaccad National High School.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of Senate | (Sgd.) **MANUEL B. VILLAR JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 13, 1999 and June 5, 2000,  respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: August 22, 2000.
>
> (Sgd.) **JOSEPH E. ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
