# Republic Act No. 8824

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE NAMBARAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF TABUK, PROVINCE OF KALINGA INTO AN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE NAMBARAN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8824
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2000/ra_8824_2000.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8824, August 22, 2000 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE NAMBARAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF TABUK, PROVINCE OF KALINGA INTO AN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE NAMBARAN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Nambaran National High School in the Municipality of Tabuk, Province of Kalinga is hereby converted into an agro-industrial national high school to be known as the Nambaran Agro-Industrial National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The School, shall, in addition to its present secondary curricula, offer agricultural, technical and other vocational subjects.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Nambaran National High School are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Nambaran Agro-Industrial National High School.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Nambaran National High School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Nambaran Agro-Industrial National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of Senate | (Sgd.) **MANUEL B. VILLAR JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 3, 1999 and June 5, 2000,  respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: August 22, 2000.
>
> (Sgd.) **JOSEPH E. ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
