# Republic Act No. 8943

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE MADDELA AGRO-INDUSTRIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - NAGTIPUNAN ANNEX IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF NAGTIPUNAN, PROVINCE OF QUIRINO FROM THE MADDELA AGRO-INDUSTRIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND CONVERTING THE SAME INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE NAGTIPUNAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8943
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2000/ra_8943_2000.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 8943             August 22, 2000**
>
> **AN ACT SEPARATING THE MADDELA AGRO-INDUSTRIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - NAGTIPUNAN ANNEX IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF NAGTIPUNAN, PROVINCE OF QUIRINO FROM THE MADDELA AGRO-INDUSTRIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND CONVERTING THE SAME INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE NAGTIPUNAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **SECTION 1.** The Maddela Agro-Industrial National High School - Nagtipunan Annex in the Municipality of Nagtipunan, Province of Quirino is hereby separated from the Maddela Agro-Industrial National High School and converted into an independent national high school to be known as the Nagtipunan National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports shall implement this Act and shall take the necessary steps for the conversion of this school.
>
> **Section 3.** So as not to disrupt the present administrative operation of the Maddela Agro-Industrial National High School - Nagtipunan Annex, the incumbent school administrator, if qualified, shall be the first administrator of the national high school. The teachers and other school personnel shall be absorbed into the new upgraded positions that may be created in accordance with the needs of the curricular offerings of the school. They shall receive compensation and privileges equal to their counterparts in existing national high school in accordance with the Revised Compensation and Position Classification System.
>
> **Section 4.** All assets, fixed and movable, personnel records and documents of the Maddela Agro-Industrial National High School - Nagtipunan Annex are hereby transferred to the Nagtipunan National High School.
>
> **Section 5.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Maddela Agro-Industrial National High School - Nagtipunan Annex. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Nagtipunan National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 6.** All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed accordingly.
>
> **Section 7.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, **August 22, 2000**
>
>
>
