# Republic Act No. 8588

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE GUINDARUHAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL EXTENSION IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF MINGLANILLA, PROVINCE OF CEBU, FROM THE GUINDARUHAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE LIPATA CENTRAL I NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8588
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8588_1998.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8588, March 02, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT SEPARATING THE GUINDARUHAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL EXTENSION IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF MINGLANILLA, PROVINCE OF CEBU, FROM THE GUINDARUHAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE LIPATA CENTRAL I NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Guindaruhan National High School Extension in Barangay Lipata, Municipality of Minglanilla, Province of Cebu, is hereby separated from the Guindaruhan National High School in the Municipality of Minglanilla and converted into an independent national high school, to be known as the Lipata Central I National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Guindaruhan National High School Extension are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Lipata Central I National High School.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Guindaruhan National High School-Barangay Lipata Extension. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Lipata Central I National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 2, 1997 and December 8, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on March 02, 1998, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Sec. 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
