# Republic Act No. 8722

**AN ACT CREATING THE MALINTA NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN VALENZUELA, METRO MANILA, BY SEPARATING THE MALINTA ANNEX PROM THE VALENZUELA MUNICIPAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8722
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8722_1998.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8722, July 23, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CREATING THE MALINTA NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN VALENZUELA, METRO MANILA, BY SEPARATING THE MALINTA ANNEX PROM THE VALENZUELA MUNICIPAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Malinta Annex of Valenzuela Municipal High School located in Barangay Malinta, Municipality of Valenzuela, Metro Manila, is hereby separated from the said Valenzuela Municipal High School and thereafter created as an independent educational institution to be known as the Malinta National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** All properties and assets presently pertaining or belonging to the Valenzuela Municipal High School Malinta Annex are hereby transferred to the newly created Malinta National High School.Ꮮαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Valenzuela Municipal High School Malinta Annex.  Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Malinta National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall make the necessary directive to effect the separation of Malinta Annex from the Valenzuela Municipal High School, as well as to bring about the smooth operation of the Malinta National High School under this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **NEPTALI A. GONZALES** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 7, 1997 and December 15, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **HEZEL P. GACUTAN** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on July 23, 1998 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
