# Republic Act No. 8669

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE HIGH SCHOOL DEPARTMENT OF THE STATE POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE OF PALAWAN IN BARANGAY SIBALTAN, EL NIDO, PALAWAN INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS SIBALTAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8669
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8669_1998.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8669, June 25, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE HIGH SCHOOL DEPARTMENT OF THE STATE POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE OF PALAWAN IN BARANGAY SIBALTAN, EL NIDO, PALAWAN INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS SIBALTAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The High School Department of State Polytechnic College of Palawan in Barangay Sibaltan, El Nido, Palawan, shall be converted into a national high school to be known as Sibaltan National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** All assets, immovable and movable, and records of the High School Department of the State Polytechnic College of Palawan in Barangay Sibaltan, El Nido, Palawan, as well as its liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred to the Sibaltan National High School: *Provided, however,* That the positions, rights and security of tenure of academic and nonacademic personnel who chose to remain and serve in the new school shall not be impaired.
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.Ꮮαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 4.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated from the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 22, 1997 and December 10, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on June 25, 1998, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
