# Republic Act No. 8957

**AN ACT UPGRADING THE APAYAO SUB-DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE INTO A REGULAR DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE TO BE KNOWN AS THE APAYAO SECOND ENGINEERING DISTRICT AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8957
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2000/ra_8957_2000.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 8957             September 4, 2000**
>
> **AN ACT UPGRADING THE APAYAO SUB-DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE INTO A REGULAR DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE TO BE KNOWN AS THE APAYAO SECOND ENGINEERING DISTRICT AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **SECTION 1.** The Apayao Sub-District Engineering Office located in the Municipality of Luna, Province of Apayao is hereby upgraded into a regular engineering district office. It shall be known as the Apayao Second Engineering District. Subsequently, the existing engineering district office, located in the Municipality of Conner, Province of Apayao, shall be known as the Apayao First Engineering District.
>
> **Section 2.** The Apayao Second Engineering District shall assume jurisdiction over infrastructure and public works in the municipalities of Calanasan, Flora, Luna, Pudtol and Sta. Marcela. The Apayao First Engineering District shall cease jurisdiction over these municipalities and will now have jurisdiction only over infrastructure and public works in the municipalities of Conner and Kabugao.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of the Department of Public Works and Highways is hereby authorized to effect such rules, regulations and other issuances as may be necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, **September 4, 2000**
>
>
>
