# Republic Act No. 8902

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE AGUSAN DEL SUR NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - BUNAWAN EXTENSION AT BUNAWAN, PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL SUR, FROM THE AGUSAN DEL SUR NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL LOCATED IN SAN FRANCISCO, AGUSAN DEL SUR, AND CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE BUNAWAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8902
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2000/ra_8902_2000.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8902, August 22, 2000 ]**
>
> **AN ACT SEPARATING THE AGUSAN DEL SUR NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - BUNAWAN EXTENSION AT BUNAWAN, PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL SUR, FROM THE AGUSAN DEL SUR NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL LOCATED IN SAN FRANCISCO, AGUSAN DEL SUR, AND CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE BUNAWAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Agusan del Sur National High School -Bunawan Extension at Bunawan, Province of Agusan del Sur, is hereby separated from the Agusan del Sur National High School located in San Francisco, Agusan del Sur, and converted into an independent national high school to be known as the Bunawan National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, assets and liabilities of the Agusan del Sur National High School - Bunawan Extension are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Bunawan National High School.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Agusan del Sur National High School - Bunawan Extension. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Bunawan National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of Senate | (Sgd.) **MANUEL B. VILLAR JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on March 9, 1999 and June 8, 2000, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: August 22, 2000
>
> (Sgd.) **JOSEPH E. ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
