# Republic Act No. 8693

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A FIFTY-BED EXTENSION OF THE GOV. CELESTINO GALLARES MEMORIAL REGIONAL TRAINING HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF UBAY, PROVINCE OF BOHOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE DON EMILIO DEL VALLE MEMORIAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8693
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8693_1998.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8693, July 09, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT ESTABLISHING A FIFTY-BED EXTENSION OF THE GOV. CELESTINO GALLARES MEMORIAL REGIONAL TRAINING HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF UBAY, PROVINCE OF BOHOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE DON EMILIO DEL VALLE MEMORIAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established, under the supervision of the Department of Health, a fifty-bed extension hospital of the Gov. Celestino Gallares Memorial Regional Training Hospital in the Municipality of Ubay, Province of Bohol, to be known as the Don Emilio del Valle Memorial Hospital.
>
> **Section 2.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 3.** The Department of Health shall issue the necessary guidelines for the operation of the said extension hospital within sixty (60) days from approval hereof.Ꮮαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **NEPTALI A. GONZALES** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on July 24, 1996 and February 6, 1998, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **HEZEL P. GACUTAN** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on July 09, 1998, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution
>
>
>
