# Republic Act No. 8616

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE CULANDANUM BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY CULANDANUM, MUNICIPALITY OF ABORLAN, PROVINCE OF PALAWAN, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE CULANDANUM NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8616
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8616_1998.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8616, April 02, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE CULANDANUM BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY CULANDANUM, MUNICIPALITY OF ABORLAN, PROVINCE OF PALAWAN, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE CULANDANUM NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The existing Culandanum Barangay High School in Barangay Culandanum, Municipality of Aborlan, Province of Palawan, is hereby converted into a national high school to be known as the Culandanum National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue the necessary rules, orders or circulars to implement the provisions of this Act.(awÞhi(
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, records, assets and properties including buildings, sites and improvements thereof, obligations, funds and appropriations of the Culandanum Barangay High School are hereby transferred to the Culandanum National High School.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 2, 1997 and December 11, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on April 02, 1998, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
