# Republic Act No. 8517

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE IMPASUGONG COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL, KALABUGAO ANNEX IN BARANGAY KALABUGAO, MUNICIPALITY OF IMPASUGONG, PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS KALABUGAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8517
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8517_1998.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8517, February 13, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE IMPASUGONG COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL, KALABUGAO ANNEX IN BARANGAY KALABUGAO, MUNICIPALITY OF IMPASUGONG, PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS KALABUGAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Impasugong Community High School, Kalabugao-Annex in Kalabugao, Impasugong, Province of Bukidnon, is hereby converted into a national high school to be known as Kalabugao National High School. The said school shall be under the supervision of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.
>
> **Section 2.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Impasugong National High School-Kalabugao Annex. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Kalabugao National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.Ꮮαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 22, 1997 and November 17, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on February 13, 1998, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
