# Republic Act No. 8861

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE BECURAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL-SAN BASILIO ANNEX IN BARANGAY SAN BASILIO, MUNICIPALITY OF STA. RITA, PROVINCE OF PAMPANGA FROM THE BECURAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. RITA, PROVINCE OF PAMPANGA AND CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE SAN BASILIO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8861
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2000/ra_8861_2000.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8861, August 22, 2000 ]**
>
> **AN ACT SEPARATING THE BECURAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL-SAN BASILIO ANNEX IN BARANGAY SAN BASILIO, MUNICIPALITY OF STA. RITA, PROVINCE OF PAMPANGA FROM THE BECURAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. RITA, PROVINCE OF PAMPANGA AND CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE SAN BASILIO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Becuran National High School-San Basilio Annex in Barangay San Basilio, Municipality of Sta. Rita, Province of Pampanga is hereby separated from the Becuran National High School in the Municipality of Sta. Rita, Province of Pampanga, and converted into an independent national high school to be known as the San Basilio National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, records, assets and liabilities of the Becuran National High School-San Basilio Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the San Basilio National High School.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary to implement the provisions of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of Becuran National High School-San Basilio Annex. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continuous operation and maintenance of the San Basilio National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of Senate | (Sgd.) **MANUEL B. VILLAR JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 16, 2000 and June 8, 2000, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: August 22, 2000
>
> (Sgd.) **JOSEPH E. ESTRADA**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
