# Republic Act No. 8668

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE MANSILINGAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE CITY OF BACOLOD, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, INTO AN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL HIGH SCHOOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE MANSILINGAN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8668
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8668_1998.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8668, June 25, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE MANSILINGAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE CITY OF BACOLOD, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, INTO AN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL HIGH SCHOOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE MANSILINGAN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Mansilingan National High School in the City of Bacolod, Province of Negros Occidental, is hereby converted into an agro-industrial high school, to be known as the Mansilingan Agro-Industrial High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Mansilingan Agro-Industrial High School, in addition to its present secondary offerings, shall provide technical and special instructions for special purposes, courses in agriculture and technology as well as short-term technical and vocational courses, subject to the policies of the Bureau of Vocational and Technical Courses of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports is hereby directed to take such steps as may be necessary for the immediate conversion and operation of the Mansilingan Agro-Industrial High School.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged to the appropriations of the Mansilingan National High School under the current General Appropriations Act.  Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued operation of the Mansilingan Agro-Industrial High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated from the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 6, 1997 and December 10, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on June 25, 1998, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
