# Republic Act No. 8958

**AN ACT UPGRADING THE SURIGAO DEL SUR SUB-DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE INTO A REGULAR DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE TO BE KNOWN AS THE SURIGAO DEL SUR SECOND ENGINEERING DISTRICT AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8958
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2000/ra_8958_2000.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 8958             September 4, 2000**
>
> **AN ACT UPGRADING THE SURIGAO DEL SUR SUB-DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE INTO A REGULAR DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE TO BE KNOWN AS THE SURIGAO DEL SUR SECOND ENGINEERING DISTRICT AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **SECTION 1.** The Surigao del Sur Sub-District Engineering Office located in the Municipality of Bislig, Province of Surigao del Sur is hereby upgraded into a regular engineering district office. It shall be known as the Surigao del Sur Second Engineering District. Subsequently, the existing engineering district office, located in the Municipality of Tandag, Province of Surigao del Sur, shall be known as the Surigao del Sur First Engineering District.
>
> **Section 2.** The Surigao del Sur Second Engineering District shall assume jurisdiction over infrastructure and public works in all the municipalities of the Second Congressional District of the Province of Surigao del Sur.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of the Department of Public Works and Highways is hereby authorized to effect such rules, regulations and other issuances as may be necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, **September 4, 2000**
>
>
>
