# Republic Act No. 8618

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE EXISTING NARRA HIGH SCHOOL-PANACAN ANNEX IN BARANGAY PANACAN, MUNICIPALITY OF NARRA, PROVINCE OF PALAWAN, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE PANACAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8618
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1998/ra_8618_1998.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8618, April 02, 1998 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE EXISTING NARRA HIGH SCHOOL-PANACAN ANNEX IN BARANGAY PANACAN, MUNICIPALITY OF NARRA, PROVINCE OF PALAWAN, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE PANACAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The existing Narra High School-Panacan Annex in Barangay Panacan, Municipality of Narra, Province of Palawan, is hereby converted into a national high school to be known as the Panacan National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue the necessary rules, orders and circulars to implement the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, records, assets and properties including buildings, sites, and the improvements thereof, obligations, funds and appropriations of the Narra High School-Panacan Annex are hereby transferred to the Panacan National High School.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Narra National High School-Panacan Annex.  Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Panacan National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 5, 1997 and December 10, 1997, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Lapsed into law on April 02, 1998, without the signature President, in accordance with Article VI Section. 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
