# Republic Act No. 2703

**An Act Appropriating Funds to Carry Out the Purposes of the Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission Created by Executive Order Numbered Fifty-Two, Dated August Ten, Nineteen Hundred Fifty-Four**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 2703
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1960/ra_2703_1960.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 2703**
>
> **An Act Appropriating Funds to Carry Out the Purposes of the Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission Created by Executive Order Numbered Fifty-Two, Dated August Ten, Nineteen Hundred Fifty-Four**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The sum of three million six hundred thousand pesos is hereby appropriated, out of the general funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to be treated as a revolving fund for the celebration of the First Centenary of the birth of Jose Rizal, including the payment of salaries of personnel, travelling expenses of the same, purchase of Rizaliana materials and equipment, publication of unexpurgated works of Jose Rizal and such works of others and about him as are considered necessary in the proper understanding of the meaning of his life and labors, for the holding of a Rizal International Congress, the sponsoring of the International Cultural Exposition, the improvement of the Rizal Monument at the Luneta, and other sundry expenses: *Provided,* That the amount shall be disbursed as follows: Two million during the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty to nineteen hundred sixty-one and one million six hundred thousand during the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-one to nineteen hundred sixty-two: *Provided, further,* That the overhead expenses in any given year shall not exceed twelve per centum of the appropriation for that year: And *Provided, further,* That whatever amount not spent after fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-two may be utilized for the construction of the Rizal Cultural Shrine and the improvement of the Rizal Monument at Luneta.
>
> **Section 2.** The books and the publications, stamps, medals, etc., issued or published by the Commission shall be sold without profit to the public, and the proceeds therefrom shall be made immediately available to the Commission for which it was created and organized until the termination of its work.
>
> **Section 3.** Said sum is to be placed at the disposal of the Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission created by Executive Order No. 52 on August ten, nineteen hundred fifty-four. Such sum as may not be expended after the dissolution of the Commission and upon the completion of its work shall revert to the National Treasury.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 18, 1960.
>
>
>
