# Executive Order No. 368

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER 356 DATED 12 AUGUST 1996 WHICH PROVIDES FOR THE IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES ON THE INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS TO FASTTRACK SRA LOCALIZATION, TO INCLUDE THE NATIONAL COUNCIL ON THE ROLE OF THE FILIPINO WOMEN IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE SOCIAL REFORM COUNCIL**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 368
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1996/eo_368_1996.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 368 September 5, 1996**
>
> AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER 356 DATED 12 AUGUST 1996 WHICH PROVIDES FOR THE IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES ON THE INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS TO FASTTRACK SRA LOCALIZATION, TO INCLUDE THE NATIONAL COUNCIL ON THE ROLE OF THE FILIPINO WOMEN IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE SOCIAL REFORM COUNCIL
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order 356 dated 12 August 1996 provides for the expanded membership of the Social Reform Council and implementing guidelines on the institutional arrangements to fast track SRA Localization;
>
> WHEREAS, there is a need to mainstream gender concerns in all SRA flagship programs as affirmed during the National Anti-Poverty Summit held last 19-20 March 1996;
>
> WHEREAS, the President instructed the Social Reform Council to monitor the implementation of the commitment of the Philippine Government in the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women relative to the Beijing Platform of Action;
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 208 dated 10 October 1994, as amended by Executive Order No. 268 dated 04 August 1995, strengthened and reconstituted the National Commission on the Role of the Filipino Women to be the primary policy making and coordinating body of all women development programs and institutions;
>
> NOW THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Executive Order No. 356 to include the National Council on the Role of Filipino Women in the membership of the Social Reform Council.
>
> This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> DONE in the city of Manila, this 5th day of September in the Year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Six.
>
>
>
