# Executive Order No. 347

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE LEGAZPI PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 347
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1996/eo_347_1996.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 347 June 18, 1996**
>
> DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE LEGAZPI PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY
>
> WHEREAS, the Port of Legazpi is one of the major ports in the country;
>
> WHEREAS, there is a need to expand the Port of Legazpi to accommodate projected increases in port traffic and to program the development of the necessary port facilities to support the demands of the shipping trade within the region;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> Section 1. The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Legazpi is hereby expanded and particularly described as follows:
>
> "Beginning at point marked 1 on the plan, thence to point 2 at a distance of 180 meters with bearing South 5120' East, thence to point 3 at a distance of 304 meters with bearing South 6210' East, thence to point 4 at a distance of 270 meters with a bearing of North 65110' East, thence to point 5 at a distance of 320 meters with bearing North 3010' West, thence to point 6 at a distance of 71 meters with bearing South 61141' West , thence to point 1, the point of beginning at a distance of 310 meters with bearing South 83130' West, all comprising a total area of 131,181.86 square meters more or less".
>
> Section 2. The Legazpi Port Zone, as expanded, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the Philippine Ports Authority which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the Government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning development and utilization of the port.
>
> Section. 3. All other orders, proclamations and issuances or portions thereof, inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly. lawphi1.net
>
> Section 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of June in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.
>
>
>
