# Executive Order No. 300

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 234 DATED 07 APRIL 1995 WHICH ESTABLISHED THE GINGOOG BAY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 300
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1996/eo_300_1996.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 300 January 31, 1996**
>
> AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 234 DATED 07 APRIL 1995 WHICH ESTABLISHED THE GINGOOG BAY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 234 was issued on 07 April 1995 establishing the Gingoog Bay Development Council (GBDC);
>
> WHEREAS, said Executive Order (EO) mandated GBDC to, among others, formulate and implement short-and long-term plans for the area covered by Gingoog Bay and surrounding municipalities of Balingoan, Talisayan, Medina and Gingoog City, as well as to address policy, planning and implementation issues, and to coordinate and integrate all environment and natural resources management of related government and non-government activities in Gingoog Bay area; and
>
> WHEREAS, the same EO designated the Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources as Chair of said council;
>
> WHEREAS, it is deemed more appropriate that the Cabinet Officer for Regional Development of Region 10 should chair the Gingoog Bay Development Council, it being within his area of concern/responsibility, and for reasons of facility;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Executive Order No. 234, specifically Section I thereof, to read as follow:
>
> SECTION 1. There is hereby created, under the Office of the President, the Gingoog Bay Development Council, hereinafter referred as the "Council", composed of the following:
>
> |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | Cabinet Officer for Regional Development for Region X | | C | Chair |
> | Secretary, Department of Agriculture | | C | Vice-Chair |
> | Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural Resources | | C | Member |
> | The Executive Secretary, Office of the President | | C | Member |
> | Secretary, Department of Interior and Local Government | | C | Member |
> | Governor of Misamis Oriental | | C | Member |
> | Mayors of the concerned Local Government Units | | C | Member |
> | Three (3) Representatives from the private sector; | | C | Member |
> |  | one from a non-government organization, |  |  |
> |  | one from a fishing cooperative or fisherfolk/people's organizations |  |  |
> |  | and one from agri-business sector. |  |  |
>
> This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> All provisions of Executive Order No. 234, Series of 1995, not inconsistent herewith shall remain in effect.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of January in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.
>
>
>
