Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

Parliament PB No. **163**

Introduced by **MPs Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. John Anthony L. Lim, Eddie M. Alih, Benjamin T. Loong**

Co-authors: **MPs Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasul E. Ismael, Dr. Susana Anayatin, Mohammad Kelie U. Antao, Abdulwahab M. Pak, Michael E. Midtimbang, Diamila Disimban-Ramos, Ali O. Salik, Ramon A. Piang, Sr., and Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam**

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A DISTRICT HOSPITAL IN LANGUYAN, PROVINCE OF TAWI-TAWI, TO BE KNOWN AS THE LANGUYAN DISTRICT HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

**EXPLANATORY NOTE**

Languyan is a coastal municipality in the island province of Tawi-Tawi. The municipality has a land area of 581.20 square kilometers or 224.40 square miles which constitutes 16.03% of Tawi-Tawi's total area. Its population as determined by the 2020 Census was 37,096.¹ In terms of the delivery of health care services, the municipality is serviced only by its local RHU and an infirmary which can only offer rudimentary first aid services. With the non-availability of some of the most basic services like x-ray, ultrasound and surgical equipment, the constituents of Languyan are left with the hurdle of transporting their ill loved-ones via a private motorboat to the nearest memorial hospital located in Sapa-Sapa or Bonggao braving strong winds, waves, sea currents and even the stark darkness of the night on emergent situations. Further, the Municipality is also in dire need of a diagnostic laboratory that would be able to cater to the needs of its constituents as well as capable manpower that will deliver all the needed services with the fair compensation that a health worker deserves.

This bill establishing a Level 1 District Hospital in Languyan is presented to answer the needs of the municipality in terms of the apt delivery of Health care services to its constituents. As per DOH standards, a level 1 District Hospital should have at least the following clinical services, to wit: Consulting specialists in, but not limited to General Medicine, Pediatrics, Ob-Gyne, Surgery, Emergency and Outpatient Services, Isolation Facilities, Surgical/ Maternity Facilities. And ancillary services such as a Secondary Clinical Laboratory, Blood Station, 1st Level X-ray, Pharmacy.²

With the provision of the aforementioned facilities, the constituents of Languyan would have improved access to basic health care services that normally would take a boat ride to be achieved. The opening of new plantilla items for Health workers that is brought about by the establishment of this new Hospital would also augment the current Health care workforce that would service the Municipality. Moreover, other nearby Municipalities like Tandubas and Tabawan would also reap the benefits of this bill since some of their patients are being catered in the Infirmary found in Languyan.

My colleagues in Parliament, it is for the benefit of the people in the coastal Municipality of Languyan that this bill is presented for your approval.

(Sgd.)
**MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE**
Member of Parliament – Bangsamoro Transition Authority

¹ https://www.philatlas.com/mindanao/barmm/tawi-tawi/languyan.html
² DOH Hospitals Profile First Edition, Health Facility development Bureau, Health Facilities and Infrastructure Development Team, Department of Health, Republic of the Philippines


Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

Parliament PB No. **163**

Introduced by **MPs Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. John Anthony L. Lim, Eddie M. Alih, Benjamin T. Loong**

Co-authors: **MPs Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasul E. Ismael, Dr. Susana Anayatin, Mohammad Kelie U. Antao, Abdulwahab M. Pak, Michael E. Midtimbang, Diamila Disimban-Ramos, Ali O. Salik, Ramon A. Piang, Sr., and Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam**

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A DISTRICT HOSPITAL IN LANGUYAN, PROVINCE OF TAWI-TAWI, TO BE KNOWN AS THE LANGUYAN DISTRICT HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in Parliament assembled:

**SEC. 1. Short Title.** – This Act shall be known as the **“LANGUYAN DISTRICT HOSPITAL ACT OF 2023.”**

**SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy.** – It is the policy of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to provide for a comprehensive and integrated health service delivery for its constituents and establish by law a general hospital system to serve the health requirements of its people and ensure that the individual basic right to life shall be attainable through the prompt intervention of excellent and affordable medical services.

**SEC. 3. Establishment of Languyan District Hospital.** – There shall be established a Level I District Hospital with Fifty (50) bed capacity in the Municipality of Languyan, Tawi-Tawi which shall be under the direct administrative and technical supervision of the Integrated Provincial Health Office – Tawi-Tawi (IPHO-Tawi-Tawi).

Any future increase in bed capacity and upgrading of health care services and facilities shall be based on the annual hospital development plan which shall be prepared by the Languyan Hospital administration in coordination with IPHO-SULU.

**SEC. 4. Operational Guidelines.** – The Ministry of Health, specifically the Regulation and Licensing Enforcement Division (RLED), shall immediately include in the Ministry’s program the operational guidelines of a Level I facility with Fifty (50) bed capacity in accordance with the Department of Health (DOH) standards.

**SEC. 5. Annual Operational Plan.** – The Chief of Languyan District Hospital, in consultation and coordination with IPHO-Tawi-Tawi, shall submit to the MOH-BARMM an annual operational plan reflecting the programs, projects, activities and budgetary needs for the operation of Languyan District Hospital.

**SEC. 6. Appropriations.** – The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the Bangsamoro Appropriations Act. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the herein hospital shall be included in the annual Bangsamoro Appropriations Act.

**SEC. 7. Repealing Clause.** - All regional laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

**SEC. 8. Separability Clause.** - If any provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other parts or provisions not affected thereby shall continue to remain in full force and effect.

**SEC. 9. Effectivity.** - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in at least two (2) regional newspapers of general circulation.


**Approved,**

Authors:

(Sgd.)
**HON. ENGR. MP DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG**

**HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**

**HON. MP ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM**

**HON. MP EDDIE M. ALIH**

**HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG**

Co-authors:

**HON. MP ATTY. LAISA M. ALAMIA**

**HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN**

**HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR.**

**HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO**

**HON. MP RASUL E. ISMAEL**

**HON. MP DR. SUSANA ANAYATIN**

**HON. MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO**

**HON. MP ABDULWAHAB M. PAK**

**HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**

**HON. MP DIAMILA DISIMBAN-RAMOS**

**HON. MP ALI O. SALIK**

**HON. MP RAMON A. PIANG, SR.**

**HON. MP JAAFAR APOLLO MIKHAIL L. MATALAM**

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

