Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

Parliament PB No. 37
(Cabinet Bill)

Introduced by:

**THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DAY**

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE BANGSAMORO SCIENCE HIGH SCHOOL SYSTEM, PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in Parliament assembled:

**ARTICLE I**

**PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS**

**SECTION 1. Short Title.** – This act shall be known as the “Bangsamoro Science High School (BSHS) System Act of 2022.”

**SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy.** – The Bangsamoro Government prioritizes research and development, invention, innovation and their utilization; as well as education, training and services in science and technology. It maintains and supports a comprehensive, adequate and integrated high school science education system tailored to the needs of learners in Bangsamoro.

**SECTION 3. Creation of the Bangsamoro Science High School System.** – There is hereby established the Bangsamoro Science High School (BSHS) System which shall be at par with the standards of other science high schools in the country and shall integrate values education as a way of strengthening the foundations of science education and faith among learners in the region. The BSHS shall be under the management of the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) and shall offer free education to qualified Bangsamoro learners with the end view of preparing them for careers in science and technology.

**SECTION 4. Definition of Terms.** – For purposes of this Act, the following terms are hereby defined as follows:

(a) “*Bangsamoro Science High School*” — a secondary school offering scholarship to deserving Bangsamoro learners who shall be admitted and trained under a curriculum especially designed to prepare them for careers in science and technology.

(b) “*Values education*” — refers to one of the subjects of learners in the BSHS that aims to strengthen the foundations of faith among them as they are being trained in science and technology.

**ARTICLE II**

**ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS**

**SECTION 5. Location.** — The Bangsamoro Science High School shall be established in Parang Maguindanao. There shall likewise be other campuses that may be established in the future in other locations within the region that shall all form part of the BSHS System.

**SECTION 6. The Board of Trustees.** — The Board of Trustees of the BSHS shall be composed of:

a) The Minister of the MOST as ex-officio Chairperson;
b) The Minister of the Ministry of Basic, Higher, and Technical Education as ex-officio Vice-Chairperson;
c) The President of the Mindanao State University System;
d) The Campus Director of the BSHS, or if there are already multiple campuses, one so designated by the Chair;
e) The President of the BSHS Alumni Association;
f) The President of the Parents Teachers Association of the BSHS, or if there are already multiple campuses, one so designated by the MOST; and,
g) One representative each from the private sector representing higher education, education for the gifted, industry, agriculture, and new and emerging technologies. The private sector representatives shall be appointed by the Chairperson subject to the confirmation of the Board of Trustees. For the first set of appointments, three (3) of them shall serve for four (4) years, while the other two (2) for two (2) years. Thereafter, succeeding appointments shall have a fixed term of four (4) years.

**SECTION 7. Powers and Functions of the Board of Trustees.** — The Board of Trustees shall exercise the powers and privileges of a board of trustees as provided in Republic Act No. 11232, otherwise known as the Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines. In addition, it shall also exercise the following powers:

a) formulate policies and guidelines for the administration and operation of the BSHS System;
b) formulate policies on the appointment, promotion, retention, removal, renewal, rewards, and incentives for administrators, faculty, and staff;
c) approve the curricula submitted by the Executive Committee;
d) approve the criteria for the selection and admission of students;
e) approve the grant of scholarship, stipend, and such allowances for students;
f) approve the graduation of successful candidates from the various BSHS campuses;
g) formulate policies and rules of discipline for students, faculty, and staff;
h) approve the BSHS System budget and appropriate to the ends specified by law such sums as may be provided by law for the support of the BSHS System;
i) promulgate its own rules of procedure, and prescribe for the administration of the BSHS System such general rules and regulations, not contrary to law, as are consistent with the purpose of the BSHS System, as defined in section 3 of this Act;
j) receive in trust legacies, gifts, and donations of real and personal property of all kinds and administer the same in accordance with the directions and instructions of the donor, and in the absence thereof, in such manner as the Board of Trustees may in its discretion determine for the benefit of the BSHS System;
k) develop policies for the expansion of enrolment in the campuses under the BSHS System;
l) set policies and criteria to rationalize the establishment of science high schools under the System, for its evaluation and approval;
m) prepare strategic plans to enhance the capability of the System in developing human resources with focus on youth with special talents in science and mathematics; and,
n) perform such other functions as may be essential or necessary to the furtherance of the purposes of this Act;

**SECTION 8. Quorum.** A quorum of the Board of Trustees shall consist of a majority of all the members holding office at the time the Board is called. Any proceedings against the Board of Trustees shall be served on the Trustee or the Secretary of the Board of Trustees.

**SECTION 9. The Campus Director.** — The school shall be headed by a Campus Director (CD) who shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees, on the basis of a search process. He/she shall have a fixed term of six (6) years, renewable for another term at the option of the Board. The CD shall not be removed from office except for cause.

The CD shall be the administrative and academic head of his or her campus and is responsible for the campus’ smooth operations. The CD may constitute a consultative body which may act as a citizen’s arm to interpret the educational needs of the service area of the campus.

**SECTION 10. The Executive Committee.** — The BSHS shall have an Executive Committee consisting of the CD, the heads of department, and such other ranking faculty members or officials of the BSHS as may be determined by the CD.

It shall have the following powers and functions:

a. to screen and select the students for admission to the BSHS;
b. to select the recipients of the scholarship, stipends and other allowances; and,
c. to develop the curricula, course of study, and rules of discipline subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.

The Executive Committee shall implement and execute the policies established by the Board of Trustees and shall exercise such other functions, powers and duties as the Board may prescribe.

**SECTION 11. Legacies, Gifts and Conditions.** All legacies, gifts, and conditions for the benefit of the BSHS System, or for its support and maintenance, or for aid to any of its students, shall be tax-exempt and shall enjoy allowable deduction from the gross income of the donors. For the purpose of the income tax, the BSHS System is exempt from paying all taxes, fees, assessments and other charges of the Government, its branches and subdivisions.

**SECTION 12. Incomes and Donations.** All revenues and donations to the BSHS System shall go to a special fund to be known as the Bangsamoro Science High School Fund. This Fund shall be expended by the Board of Trustees exclusively for the purpose of implementing this Act.

**SECTION 13. Appropriations.** — The funds necessary to carry out the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the annual appropriations of the Bangsamoro Government.

**ARTICLE III**

**FINAL PROVISIONS**

**SECTION 14. Separability Clause.** — If any provisions of this Act or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Act or application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

**SECTION 15. Repealing Clause.** — All other regional acts, decrees, instructions, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

**SECTION 16. Effectivity.** — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper of regional circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

Approved,

**HON. AHOD BALAWAG EBRAHIM**
Chief Minister

**ABDULRAOF A. MACACUA**
Senior Minister

