# GR-L-41508

**CANDELARIO VILLAMOR vs. COURT OF APPEALS**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: CANDELARIO VILLAMOR vs. COURT OF APPEALS
- **Ponente**: Bidin, J.
- **Division**: THIRD DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri1988/jun1988/gr_l-41508_1988.html)

---

> Manila
>
> THIRD DIVISION
>
> **G.R. No. L-41508 June 27, 1988**
>
> CANDELARIO VILLAMOR, PILAR DE LA SERNA, BARTOLOME VILLAMOR, RAFAELA RETUYA, SOFRONIO VILLAMOR, PILAR SEMBLANTE, ELEUTERIO VILLAMOR, CARIDAD GORECHO, MARCOS OR and GUADALUPE CEDEÑO petitioners,
>
> vs.
> **HON. COURT OF APPEALS and DANIELA CENIZA UROT, in her capacity as administratrix of the estate of Fr. Nicanor Cortes, under Sp. Proc. No. 3062-R,** respondents.
>
>
>
> **BIDIN, *J.:***
>
> This petition for review on certiorari seeks to annul and set aside the decision of the Court of Appeals which affirmed that of the then Court of First Instance of Cebu, Branch XL declaring null and void [1] the Project of Partition in Special Proceedings Nos. 262-C and 343-C executed on December 7, 1946, [2] the "Order" of April 14, 1948 which approved said Project of Partition, [3] the "Auto" of November 25, 1953 which closed and terminated the two (2) administration proceedings and which authorized the delivery of seven (7) parcels of land to Ireneo Villamor and Paula Villamor, and [4] the extra-judicial settlement and partition executed by the petitioners herein on July 28, 1969.
>
> Spouses Victor Cortes and Maria Castañeda had eight (8) children, namely: Rufino, Barbara, Florencio, Casimira, Brigida, Braulia, Margarita and Eugenia. Of the eight children, six died single and without issue. Barbara Cortes begot a son by the name of Eustaquio Cortes. Rufino Cortes, who died on June 12, 1909 left two alleged legitimate children, Ireneo Cortes Villamor and Paula Cortes Villamor. The last to die of the Cortes children was Eugenia Cortes. She died on January 8, 1931.
>
> Eustaquio Cortes, son of Barbara, married one Sixta Ceniza. Born to them were five children, namely: Dionisio, Bartolome, Nicanor, Agapita and Amancia, all surnamed Cortes. All five remained unmarried and died without will nor forced heirs. Dionisio, Amancia and Agapita predeceased their father Eustaquio. Eustaquio died on October 20, 1932, survived by his spouse and two sons, Bartolome and Nicanor. Bartolome who was a Catholic priest, died on November 14, 1937. Nicanor Cortes, also known as Father Gabriel Maria Cortes, died as a monk of the Carthusian Order in Barcelona, Spain on August 28, 1969. He was the last of the direct descendants of the Barbara Cortes line.
>
> On the other hand, Paula Villamor, alleged daughter of Rufino Cortes, died single on January 29, 1967 and without issue. Ireneo Villamor married one Bersabela Perez. Said marriage was blessed with five children, namely: Candelario, Bartolome, Sofronio, Eleuterio and Marcos, all surnamed Villamor, the petitioners, herein. Ireneo Villamor died on April 21, 1966.
>
> It appears that shortly after the death of Bartolome Cortes, Special Proceedings No. 227 was instituted for the settlement of his estate. Fr. Diosdado Camomot, a close friend of Bartolome, was named administrator.
>
> Sometime between 1937 and 1938, Special Proceedings No. 262-C, which relates to the intestate estates of Eugenia, Casimira Florencio, Braulia, Margarita and Barbara, all surnamed Cortes was filed. This proceeding evidently did not include a brother, Rufino Cortes. Atty. Primitive Sato was appointed administrator.
>
> On September 27, 1938, Paula Cortes Villamor and Ireneo Cortes Villamor, claiming to be the legitimate children of Rufino Cortes, filed a petition for the administration of the estate of Rufino Cortes, under Special Proceedings No. 343-C, to protect their rights and counteract the effects of Special Proceedings No. 262-C. Notice of the hearing of the petition was published in the "Nasud," a newspaper of general circulation on October 13, 20 and 27, 1938. Appointed administrator in this proceeding was one Moises Mendoza, who thereafter submitted an inventory of the properties allegedly belonging to the estate of Rufino Cortes. The properties enumerated in the inventory were the very same properties subject of Special Proceedings Nos. 227 and 262-C.
>
> A scramble over the control and possession of the, properties ensued between the heirs of Barbara Cortes, represented by Sixta Ceniza with the help of Fr. Camomot, and the Rufino Cortes line represented by Ireneo and Paula Cortes Villamor. On May 20, 1946, Ireneo and Paula Cortes Villamor and Father Camomot filed a joint motion in Special Proceedings No. 262-C and Special Proceedings No. 343-C, wherein they manifested that "the heirs have arrived at an agreement to settle the matter amicably between themselves by partitioning the estate among them"1 Thus, after six months of negotiation, or on December 7, 1946, a Project of Partition was executed by Sixta Ceniza and Father Camomot, in his capacity as administrator of the Estate of Bartolome Cortes, assisted by their counsel, Attys. Hipolito Alo and Fermin Yap, on one hand, and Ireneo and Paula Cortes Villamor, assisted by Atty. Gaudencio Juezan, on the other. The Project of Partition was thumbmarked Sixta Ceniza at the house of a relative, Fortunate vda. de Ceniza, where Sixta Ceniza lived at that time. In said Project of Partition, seven parcels of land were apportioned and delivered to Ireneo and Paula Cortes Villamor. The said Project of Partition is reproduced as follows:
>
> > "REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINE
> > COURT OF FIRST INSTANCE OF CEBU
> >
> > Sp. Proc. Nos. 262 & 343
> >
> > IN REPUBLIC ESTATE OF BARBARA CORTES,
> > FLORENCIO CORTES, RUFINO CORTES,
> > CASIMIRA CORTES, BRIGIDA CORTES,
> > BRAULIA CORTES, MARIA CORTES
> > and EUGENIA CORTES,
> > Deceased.
> >
> > ------------------------------------------
> >
> > PROJECT OF PARTITION
> >
> > Come now Sixta Ceniza and Rev. Diosdado Camomot, the latter as administrator of the estate of Bartolome Cortes in Sp. Proc. No. 227 of this Court assisted by their Attorneys Hipolito Alo and Fermin Yap, to be known hereinafter as the First Party; Ireneo Cortes Villamor, assisted by their Attorney Gaudencio R. Juezan, to be referred hereinafter as the Second Party, to this Hon. Court respectfully state:
> >
> > That Sixta Ceniza above referred to is the sole heir of Bartolome Cortes now deceased, being the legitimate mother of the latter;
> >
> > That Rev. Diosdado Camomot is the legal administrator of the estate of said Bartolome Cortes in the Sp. Proc. No. 227 of this Court;
> >
> > That Barbara, Florencio, Rufino; Casimira, Brigida, Braulia, Maria and Eugenia, all surnamed Cortes, were brothers and sisters. They died without leaving any parent nor children except Rufino and Barbara Cortes;
> >
> > That Barbara Cortes left Bartolome Cortes as a nephew and the latter left his mother Sixta Ceniza as his heir;
> >
> > That Rufino Cortes left Ireneo and Paula Cortes as his heirs, being his legitimate children;
> >
> > That Sixta Ceniza, Ireneo Cortes Villamor and Paula Cortes Villamor are all Filipinos by birth and of legal ages and residents of Mandaue, Cebu, Philippines;
> >
> > That the deceased Eugenia Cortes and Rufino Cortes, left no debt, nor will;
> >
> > That the first and the second Parties hereby acknowledge that all the estate appearing in the inventories submitted under administration Sp. Proc. Nos. 262 and 343 in this Court, belong to the deceased Eugenia Cortes and Rufino Cortes, being the real owners thereof, of which Eustaquio and Bartolome Cortes were extra judicial administrators;
> >
> > That said Sixta Ceniza, Ireneo Cortes Villamor and Paula Cortes Villamor do hereby declare themselves as the only heirs of said Eugenia and Rufino Cortes and adjudicate to themselves the above-described properties and amicably partition same among themselves in the manner, form and share hereinbelow shown;
> >
> > That the First and Second Parties have agreed, as they do hereby agree, to partition, as they do hereby partition, the properties above referred to, amicably between them, in the form, manner, and share, to wit:
> >
> > To Sixta Ceniza through Rev. Diosdado Camomot, the latter in his capacity as administrator of the estate of Bartolome Cortes, the following parcels of land with improvements thereon, are hereby apportioned and delivered:
> >
> > 1. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Alang-Alang, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Eustaquio Cortes
> >
> > East, Geronimo Lambo
> >
> > South, Conrado Jayme
> >
> > West, Serafina Mendoza
> >
> > Area, 47 Area, 37 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Bartolome
> >
> > Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31520
> >
> > 2. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Calle Gral, Ricarte
> >
> > East, Riachuelo
> >
> > South, Mariano del Castillo
> >
> > West, Juana Mayol
> >
> > Area, 18 Ares,
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio
> >
> > Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31531
> >
> > 3. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Hrs. of Fermin Cortes
> >
> > East, Riachuelo
> >
> > South, Hrs. of Pio Mendoza and Juana Mendoza
> >
> > West, Severino Cabajug and Ceferino Mendoza
> >
> > Area, 16 Ares, and 80 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio
> >
> > Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31529
> >
> > 4. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Rita Alilin and Ambrocio Cabahug
> >
> > South, Rita Alilin
> >
> > West, Ceferino Mendoza
> >
> > Area, 13 Ares & 40 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio Cortes
> >
> > as per Tax Dec. No. 31628
> >
> > 5. A parcel of agricultural land with an improvements thereon located in Pagsubungan, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Hrs. of Tomas Osmeña and Victor Perez
> >
> > East, Fernando Atamosa
> >
> > South, Rio de Butuanon and Hrs. of Tomas Osmeña
> >
> > West, Private Ceniza and Phil. Railway Co.
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31523
> >
> > 6. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Pagsabungan, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Hipolito Pareja
> >
> > East, Francisca Estrera
> >
> > South, Enrique Diano and Catalina Pareja
> >
> > West, Blas Retuerto
> >
> > Area 1 Ha. 38 Area, 21 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eugenia Cortes
> >
> > as per Tax Dec. No. 31536
> >
> > 7. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Kanduman Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Jacinto Mayol
> >
> > East, Sergio Suyco
> >
> > South, Martin Seno
> >
> > West, Mariano Alivio
> >
> > Area, 1 Ha. 03 Area, 24 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of the heirs of
> >
> > Casimira Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31514
> >
> > 8. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Kanduman Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Jacinto Mayol and Policarpio and Josefa Cortes
> >
> > East, Claudia Osmeña and Camino Vecinal
> >
> > South, Camino Vecinal and Hrs. of Tomas Osmeña
> >
> > West, Jacinto Mayol
> >
> > Area, 2 Has, 45 Ares--07 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of the heirs of
> >
> > Casimira Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31515
> >
> > 9. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Opao, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Brook
> >
> > East, Hrs. of Cesario Mendoza and Benito Ceniza and Juan Trox
> >
> > South, Hermenegildo Alivio
> >
> > West, Basilia Cabahug and Prudencia Cabahug
> >
> > Area, 4 Has. 96 Area, 05 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of heirs of
> >
> > Casimira Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31516
> >
> > 10. A parcel of land [rural] with all improvements thereon located in Magikay Mandaue, Cebu, bounded on the North by Ireneo Villamor; East, Ireneo Villamor; South, Marcelo Cortes and Ireneo Villamor; West, Callejon, with an area of one Ha. 27 Area, and 99 Centares, covered by Tax Dec. No. 31518;
> >
> > 11. A parcel of land with all improvement thereon located in Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Calle Ricarte
> >
> > East, Riachuelo
> >
> > South, Riachuelo
> >
> > West, Mariano del Castillo
> >
> > Area, 11 Ares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Bartolome
> >
> > Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31521
> >
> > 12. A mango tree located in the name of Apolonio Soco as per Tax Dec. No. 31527 declared in the name of Eustaquio Cortes.
> >
> > \*14. A parcel of land [rural] with all improvements thereon located in Magikay Mandaue, Cebu, bounded on the North by Florentino Perez; East, Pablo Perez; South, Ireneo Villamor; West, Romualdo Omo, with an area of one Hectare, 39 Ares and 06 Centares, covered by Tax Dec. No. 31317; This is known as Lot No. 560-A of the plan called Hacienda de Mandaue."
> >
> > 15. A parcel of land [rural] with all improvements thereon located in Magikay Mandue Cebu, bounded on the north by Susana Cortes and others; East, by Susana Cortes and others; South Ireneo Villamor and Hermana; and West, Ireneo Villamor and Hermana; with an area of one Hectare, 26 Ares and 99 Centares, covered by Tax Dec. No. 31519.
> >
> > To Ireneo Cortes Villamor and Paula Cortes Villamor the following are hereby apportioned and delivered:
> >
> > 1. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Paula Perez
> >
> > East, Car. Prov. and Pelagia Pintor
> >
> > South, Rafaela Judilla and D. Mendoza
> >
> > West, Riachuelo
> >
> > Area, 1 Ha. 46 Ares and 30 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio
> >
> > Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31533
> >
> > 2. A parcel of residential land with all improvements thereon Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Calle A. del Rosario
> >
> > East, Fidel Jayme
> >
> > South, Bartolome Cortes and Martina Soco
> >
> > West, Carr. Provincial
> >
> > Area, 5,390 square meters
> >
> > Declared in the name of Bartolome and
> >
> > Eustaquio Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31522
> >
> > 3. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Kanzaga Consolacion, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Ignacio Niez
> >
> > East, Saturnino Quipo y Sixto Ermac
> >
> > South, Alejandro del Rosario y Doroteo Bolhot
> >
> > West, Apolinario Palang
> >
> > Area, 22 Ares and 36 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio Cortes
> >
> > as per Tax Dec. No. 17031
> >
> > 4. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Camino Vecinal
> >
> > East, Andres Cabahug
> >
> > South, Julio Bars and Ciriaco Cortes
> >
> > West, Eusebio Soco and Phil. Railway Co.
> >
> > Area 53 Ares and 92 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio Cortes
> >
> > as per Tax Declaration No. 31534
> >
> > 5. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Severina Cabajug and others
> >
> > East, Simon Cortes
> >
> > South, Callejon
> >
> > West, Calle Gral. del Pilar
> >
> > Area, 72 Ares & 96 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio Cortes as per Tax Dec. No. 31532
> >
> > 6. A parcel of agricultural land located in Alang-Alang, Mandaue, Cebu, with all improvements thereon, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Callejon and Marciano Cuison
> >
> > East, Calle Plaridel and Enrique Capirol
> >
> > South, Calle P. Burgos and Bernardo A. Flores
> >
> > West, Eusebio Soco
> >
> > Area, 4 Has. 53 Ares, 47 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio Cortes
> >
> > as per Tax Dec. No. 31530
> >
> > 7. A parcel of agricultural land with all improvements thereon located in Centro, Mandaue, Cebu, bounded as follows:
> >
> > North, Benito Ceniza, Filomena Pans, Benito Ceniza
> >
> > East, Emiliano Cuson
> >
> > South, Calle A. del Rosario
> >
> > West, Carr. Prov. Rita Alilin and others
> >
> > Area, 3 Has. 08 Ares, 32 Centares
> >
> > Declared in the name of Eustaquio Cortes
> >
> > as per Tax Dec. No. 31524
> >
> > The parties hereto do hereby give their respective conformity to the foregoing partition and do hereby accept and receive the properties respectively apportioned to them as indicated above.
> >
> > That the parties hereto shall take immediate possession and enjoyment of their respective shares subject to the payment of the honorary fees of administrators Primitive N. Sato and Moises Mendoza whose claims for such honorary, are still pending determination by the Court, if the personal properties would not be sufficient to cover such fees.
> >
> > That the parties hereto shall take immediate possession and enjoyment of their respective shares subject to the payment of the honorary fees of administrators Primitive N. Sato and Moises Mendoza whose claims for such honorary, are still pending determination by the Court, if the personal properties would not be sufficient to cover such fees.
> >
> > That the Second Party hereby assume the responsibility to pay Atty. Gaudencio R. Juezan, the honorary fees of the latter.
> >
> > City of Cebu, Philippines, December 7, 1946.
> >
> > |  |  |
> > | --- | --- |
> > | [Thumbmark] SIXTA CENIZA Heirs of Bartolome Cortes | [(SGD.) IRENEO CORTES VILLAMOR] Heirs of Eugenia & Rufino Cortes et al. |
> >
> > [(SGD.) PAULA CORTES VILLAMOR]
> >
> > |  |  |
> > | --- | --- |
> > | [SGD.] GAUDENCIO R. JUEZAN Atty. for Ireneo Cortes Villamor and Paula Cortes Villamor | HIPOLITO ALO & FERMIN YAP |
> > |  | By: |
> > | [SGD.] DIOSDADO CAMOMOT Administrator of the estate of Bartolome Cortes in Sp. Proc. No. 227. | [SGD.] FERMIN YAP Attys. for Sixta Ceniza & Administrator Diosdado Camomot of the estate of Bartolome Cortes in Sp. Proc. No. 227   PRIMITIVO N. SATO In his own behalf and that of Moises Mendoza, as administrators in Sp. Proc. Nos. 262 and 343. |
> >   |
