# Republic Act No. 6415

**AN ACT CREATING CERTAIN POSITIONS IN THE SUB-PROVINCE OF BILIRAN, PROVINCE OF LEYTE, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED TWENTY-ONE HUNDRED FORTY-ONE, AS AMENDED**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6415
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1971/ra_6415_1971.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6415, October 04, 1971 ]**
>
> AN ACT CREATING CERTAIN POSITIONS IN THE SUB-PROVINCE OF BILIRAN, PROVINCE OF LEYTE, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED TWENTY-ONE HUNDRED FORTY-ONE, AS AMENDED
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Republic Act Numbered Twenty-one hundred forty-one, as amended by Republic Act Numbered Fifty-nine hundred seventy-seven, is further amended by inserting a new section after Section seven-B which shall read as follows:
>
> "Section 7-C. There are hereby created the positions of assistant provincial fiscal of the subprovince, subprovincial engineer, subprovincial health officer and subprovincial treasurer in the Subprovince of Biliran, with permanent stations in the capital of the subprovince, which offices shall be organized within thirty days from the approval of this Act.  Appointment to the positions of provincial fiscal and provincial health officer shall be made in accordance with existing laws.  The deputy provincial treasurer shall become the subprovincial treasurer and the subprovincial engineer shall be appointed by the Governor of the subprovince with the concurrence of the Provincial Board.  The appointees thereof shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are vested in their respective office by law as if the Subprovince of Biliran were a different and separate province.  Within thirty days after the approval of this Act, the offices herein created shall be provided with the necessary personnel by the Provincial Board of Leyte.  The salaries of the provincial fiscal and provincial health officer shall be fixed in accordance with law and the salaries of the provincial treasurer and provincial engineer shall be adjusted accordingly.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** Sections Seven-C and Seven-D of the same Act are hereby changed to Sections Seven-D and Seven-E, respectively.
>
> **Section 3.** The National Government shall share in the payment of the salaries for the positions herein created in accordance with existing laws.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, October 4, 1971.
>
>
>
