# Republic Act No. 6315

**AN ACT CONVERTING RAGAY NATIONAL RURAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF RAGAY, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR, INTO A NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERIES SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS RAGAY NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERIES SCHOOL AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6315
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1971/ra_6315_1971.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6315, June 19, 1971 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING RAGAY NATIONAL RURAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF RAGAY, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR, INTO A NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERIES SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS RAGAY NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERIES SCHOOL AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR.
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Ragay National Rural High School in the Municipality of Ragay, Province of Camarmes Sur, is hereby converted into a national agricultural and fisheries school to be known as the Ragay National Agricultural and Fisheries School: *Provided, however,* That only a general education curriculum with practical arts shall be offered in first and second years, and the vocational education curriculum shall be offered in the third and fourth years: *Provided, further,* That the school shall offer short vocational courses for training in vocations needed in the locality which shall be open to elementary school graduates: *Provided, finally,* That the school shall open, as soon as feasible, two-year post secondary technical courses.  This school shall offer courses in modern fishing method, in addition to the courses now offered.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** The sum of three hundred thousand pesos is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out of any funds in National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the conversion, operation and maintenance of said school during the fiscal year nineteen hundred seventy.  There after, the sums necessary for the operation and maintenance of said school shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Enacted without Executive approval, June 19, 1971.
>
>
>
