# Republic Act No. 6327

**AN ACT CONVERTING BAYBAY NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND VOCATIONAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SINILOAN, PROVINCE OF LAGUNA, INTO A COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE BAYBAY NATIONAL COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF THE NECESSARY FUNDS THEREFOR.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6327
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1971/ra_6327_1971.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6327, June 19, 1971 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING BAYBAY NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND VOCATIONAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SINILOAN, PROVINCE OF LAGUNA, INTO A COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE BAYBAY NATIONAL COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF THE NECESSARY FUNDS THEREFOR.
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Baybay National Agricultural and Vocational School located in the Municipality of Siniloan, Province of Laguna, is hereby converted into a college to be known as the Baybay National College of Agriculture and Technology.
>
> **Section 2.** The Baybay National College of Agriculture and Technology shall offer, in addition to the secondary agricultural curriculum, any or all of the following collegiate courses at the discretion of the Director of the Bureau of Vocational Education:
>
> a. Two-year technical agricultural and homemaking courses leading to the title of Associate in Agricultural Technology and Associate in Homemaking Technology.
>
> b.   Five-year technical agriculture and Teacher Education courses leading to the degrees of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture (with major), Bachelor of Science in Agricultural Engineering, Bachelor of Science in Agricultural Homemaking, Bachelor of Science in Agro-Business Administration.
>
> **Section 3.** The Baybay National College of Agriculture and Technology shall be headed and administered by a National Agricultural Superintendent.  A position of principal to head the secondary department and a position of assistant college head, shall be created to assist the head of the college in the administration of the college.
>
> **Section 4.** The physical and financial assets, liabilities, personnel, equipment, and records of the Baybay National Agricultural and Vocational School stand transferred to the Baybay National College of Agriculture and Technology.
>
> **Section 5.** The sum of three hundred thousand pesos is hereby authorized to be appropriated annually, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the operation and maintenance of the said college in addition to its current appropriation beginning the fiscal year nineteen hundred seventy-one.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 6.** The Secretary of Education is hereby empowered to reorganize said school accordingly.
>
> **Section 7.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Enacted without Executive approval, June 19, 1971.
>
>
>
