# Republic Act No. 6326

**AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN EMERGENCY HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF LLORENTE, PROVINCE OF EASTERN SAMAR, TO BE KNOWN AS THE LLORENTE EMERGENCY HOSPITAL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6326
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1971/ra_6326_1971.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6326, June 19, 1971 ]**
>
> AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN EMERGENCY HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF LLORENTE, PROVINCE OF EASTERN SAMAR, TO BE KNOWN AS THE LLORENTE EMERGENCY HOSPITAL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR.
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There is hereby established an emergency hospital in the Municipality of Llorente, Province of Eastern Samar, to be known as the Llorente Emergency Hospital, under the direct supervision of the Secretary of the Department of Health.  Its bed capacity shall not be less than twenty-five nor more than fifty.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** The sum of one hundred fifty thousand pesos is hereby appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the establishment, operation and maintenance of said hospital during the fiscal year nineteen hundred seventy.  Thereafter, such sums as may be needed for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Enacted without Executive approval, June 19, 1971.
>
>
>
