# Republic Act No. 6445

**AN ACT PROVIDING ONE ADDITIONAL JUDGE FOR THE FOURTH JUDICIAL DISTRICT TO PRESIDE OVER THE COURT OF FIRST INSTANCE OF NUEVA ECIJA, WITH PERMANENT STATION IN THE CITY OF SAN JOSE, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTIONS FIFTY AND FIFTY-TWO OF THE JUDICIARY ACT OF 1948, AS AMENDED,**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6445
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1972/ra_6445_1972.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6445, June 17, 1972 ]**
>
> AN ACT PROVIDING ONE ADDITIONAL JUDGE FOR THE FOURTH JUDICIAL DISTRICT TO PRESIDE OVER THE COURT OF FIRST INSTANCE OF NUEVA ECIJA, WITH PERMANENT STATION IN THE CITY OF SAN JOSE, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTIONS FIFTY AND FIFTY-TWO OF THE JUDICIARY ACT OF 1948, AS AMENDED,
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The fourth paragraph of Section fifty of Republic Act Numbered Two hundred ninety-six, known as the Judiciary Act of 1948, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
>
> "Twelve judges shall be commissioned for the Fourth Judicial District.  Eight judges shall preside over the Court of First Instance of Nueva Ecija and the Cities of Cabanatuan, San Jose, and Palayan and shall be known as judges of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth branches thereof, respectively; and four Judges shall preside over the Court of First Instance of Tarlac and shall be known as judges of the first, second, third and fourth branches thereof, respectively."1âшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** The fourth subparagraph of the second paragraph of Section fifty-two of the same Act, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
>
> "For the Fourth Judicial District, four judges shall be stationed in the City of Cabanatuan; one judge in the Municipality of Guimba, Province of Nueva Ecija; one judge in the Municipality of Gapan, same province; one judge in the Municipality of Sto. Domingo, same province: *Provided,* That as soon as the court room is constructed in Barrio Baloc, Municipality of Sto. Domingo, same province, the judge shall be stationed in the said barrio; one judge in the City of San Jose; and four judges in the Municipality of Tarlac, Province of Tarlac."
>
> **Section 3.** There is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, such sum as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, June 17, 1972.
>
>
>
