# Republic Act No. 6413

**AN ACT CREATING A THIRD SALA IN THE CITY COURT OF THE CITY OF CAGAYAN DE ORO AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6413
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1971/ra_6413_1971.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6413, October 04, 1971 ]**
>
> AN ACT CREATING A THIRD SALA IN THE CITY COURT OF THE CITY OF CAGAYAN DE ORO AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be a third sala in the City Court of Cagayan de Oro to be presided over by a city judge to be appointed by the President of the Philippines in accordance with law.  One of the city judges of the city court shall try and decide cases involving: violation of traffic laws and ordinances upon resolution passed by the city judges and approved by the Secretary of Justice.  The annual salary of the city judges shall be one thousand pesos less than that fixed by law for the district judge.  Upon approval of this Act, the judge presiding over the first sala shall be the executive judge for a term of two years and, thereafter, the office of the executive judge shall be rotated among the judges for a term of one year.  The city judges shall be entitled to the same allowance which are granted to city officials.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** There shall be a branch deputy clerk of court in each sala of the city court and shall receive an annual salary to be fixed by the Municipal Board.  The city clerk of court, deputy city clerk of court and branch deputy clerk of court shall have the power to administer oath.
>
> **Section 3.** No person shall be appointed city clerk of court unless he has been admitted to practice law in the Philippines.  The city clerk of court shall receive a salary of not less than twelve thousand pesos per annum.  He shall act as Notary Public ex-officio.  If the incumbent clerk of court does not possess the qualifications set herein, he shall automatically become assistant to the clerk of court without diminution of his present salary.
>
> **Section 4.** There shall be, under the city court, a city sheriff who shall have the same powers and duties conferred by existing laws to provincial sheriffs.  He shall receive a salary to be fixed by the Municipal Board at not less than seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum and shall be entitled to transportation and/or gasoline allowance at not less than two hundred pesos monthly.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, October 4, 1971.
>
>
>
