# Republic Act No. 6350

**AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HILONGOS GENERAL HOSPITAL IN THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6350
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1971/ra_6350_1971.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6350, June 19, 1971 ]**
>
> AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HILONGOS GENERAL HOSPITAL IN THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR.
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established, under the direct control and supervision of the Director of Medical Services, a hospital in the Municipality of Hilongos, Province of Leyte, to be known as the Hilongos General Hospital.
>
> **Section 2.** There is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the sum of five hundred thousand pesos for the construction of the Hilongos General Hospital and two hundred thousand pesos for its operation and maintenance: *Provided,* That this hospital shall have at least twenty-five beds.
>
> **Section 3.** Once this hospital is in full operation, all patients requiring hospitalization from the municipalities of Inopacan, Hindang, Hilongos, Matalom, and Bato, Province of Leyte who cannot be given medical services other hospitals shall be referred to the Hilongos General Hospital.
>
> **Section 4.** The policy-determining power of the Hilongos General Hospital is vested in the Secretary of Health, which power shall be exercised through the Chief of the Hilongos General Hospital.  The Chief must be a physician of good repute, graduate from a medical college of recognized standing, and must have for five years engage in the practice of medicine.  He shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health, upon the recommendation of the Director of Medical Services, and shall receive a compensation of not more than eleven thousand four hundred pesos per annum.  The Chief of said hospital shall have all the powers conferred generally on chiefs of government hospitals.
>
> **Section 5.** The Chief of the Hilongos General Hospital shall have authority to promulgate, with the approval of the Director of Medical Services, such rules and regulations not inconsistent with law as may be necessary to secure the efficient administration of the hospital and the proper enforcement of laws relating thereto.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 6.** With the approval of the Director of Medical Services, the Chief may allow subsistence, quarters, and laundry service in kind to physicians, nurses or employees serving in the hospital whenever such action is deemed advisable for the best interest of public service.
>
> **Section 7.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Enacted without Executive approval on June 19, 1971.
>
>
>
