# Republic Act No. 6325

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE NUEVA ECIJA PROVINCIAL HOSPITAL INTO A NATIONAL HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS THE DR. PAULINO J. GARCIA MEMORIAL RESEARCH AND MEDICAL CENTER.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6325
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1971/ra_6325_1971.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6325, June 19, 1971 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE NUEVA ECIJA PROVINCIAL HOSPITAL INTO A NATIONAL HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS THE DR. PAULINO J. GARCIA MEMORIAL RESEARCH AND MEDICAL CENTER.
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled;
>
> **Section 1.** The Nueva Ecija Provincial Hospital in the City of Cabanatuan is converted into a national hospital with a research department devoted to the different phases of medical science, to be known as the Dr. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center.
>
> **Section 2.** The bed capacity of the Center will be four hundred beds.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The sum of five hundred thousand pesos is authorized to be appropriated yearly, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the conversion, operation and maintenance of said Center during the fiscal year nineteen hundred seventy-one.  Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance, shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** The sum of two million pesos is also appropriated for the construction of an additional building for the Center.
>
> **Section 5.** This act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Enacted without Executive approval, June 19, 1971.
>
>
>
