# Executive Order No. 160

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE LIPATA PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 160
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2014/eo_160_2014.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 160
>
> DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE LIPATA PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)
>
> WHEREAS, Section 5, Article IV of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 857, or the “Revised Charter of the PPA,” provides that the PPA may submit to the President, through the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), applications for the declaration of specific areas as Port Districts (Port Zones);
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 3 of Executive Order No. 410 (s. 1990), which provides for new guidelines for the processing of applications for port zone delineation, states that applications which are jointly recommended for approval by the Philippine Ports Authority and Regional Development Council shall be submitted directly to the Office of the President;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Port of Lipata caters to domestic cargo vessels with major outgoing cargo consisting of palay, rice and fish products while the major incoming cargo consists of cements, fertilizers and general cargo, as well as inter-island (cargo/passenger) vessel plying the Manila-Romblon-Caticlan-Lipata route and vice versa; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to define the Port zone of Lipata for the planning, development, financing, and operation of said Port with the objective of promoting development through the dispersal of industries and commercial activities throughout the different regions.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** *Port of Lipata.* The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Lipata situated in Barangay Lipata, Municipality of Culasi, Province of Antique, is hereby delineated and established, particularly described as follows:
>
> Beginning at a port marked 1 on the plan, being N. 0 deg. 18' 34? W., 4,803.30 m. from BLLM No. 1, Cad. 331-D, Culasi, Antique, thence:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | N. | 58 deg. | 10' | W., | 152.56 m. | to point 2; |
> | N. | 31 deg. | 20' | E., | 170.12 m. | to point 3; |
> | DUE EAST | | | | 450.00 m. | to point 4; |
> | DUE SOUTH | | | | 289.64 m. | to point 5; |
> | S. | 81 deg. | 28' | W., | 194.35 m. | to point 6; |
> | N. | 89 deg. | 11' | W., | 34.67 m. | to point 7; |
> | N. | 67 deg. | 56' | W., | 38.88 m. | to point 8; |
> | S. | 18 deg. | 54' | W., | 70.37 m. | to point 9; |
> | N. | 70 deg. | 25' | W., | 42.62 m. | to point 10; |
> | N. | 68 deg. | 28' | W., | 13.85 m. | to point 11; |
> | S. | 26 deg. | 26' | W., | 17.14 m. | to point 12; |
> | S. | 23 deg. | 20' | W., | 12.78 m. | to point 13; |
> | S. | 29 deg. | 47' | W., | 14.47 m. | to point 14; |
> | S. | 72 deg. | 33' | W., | 10.39 m. | to point 15; |
> | N. | 20 deg. | 44' | W., | 23.35 m. | to point 16; |
> | N. | 64 deg. | 09' | W., | 5.82 m. | to point 17; |
> | N. | 23 deg. | 19' | E., | 15.60 m. | to point 18; |
> | N. | 04 deg. | 13' | E., | 25.13 m. | to point 19; |
> | N. | 62 deg. | 40' | W., | 12.40 m. | to point 20; |
> | N. | 62 deg. | 40' | W., | 12.34 m. | to point 21; |
> | N. | 23 deg. | 52' | E., | 72.55 m. | to point 22; |
> | N. | 58 deg. | 10' | W., | 49.61 m. | to point of beginning, |
>
> Containing an area of ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SEVEN THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED SEVEN (147,407) SQUARE METERS, more or less.1âwphi1
>
> **SECTION 2.** *PPA Jurisdiction.* The Lipata Port zone, as delineated, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the PPA, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development, and utilization of the port.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Repealing Clause.* All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Separability Clause.* If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
>
> **SECTION 5.** *Effectivity.* This Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 14th day of February, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Fourteen.
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
