# Executive Order No. 158

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE ROXAS PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 158
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2014/eo_158_2014.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 158
>
> DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE ROXAS PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)
>
> WHEREAS, Section 5, Article IV of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 857, or the “Revised Charter of the PPA,” provides that the PPA may submit to the President, through the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), applications for the declaration of specific areas as Port Districts (Port Zones);
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 3 of Executive Order No. 410 (s. 1990), which provides for new guidelines for the processing of applications for port zone delineation, states that applications which are jointly recommended for approval by the Philippine Ports Authority and Regional Development Council shall be submitted directly to the Office of the President;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Port of Roxas caters to both Roll-on and Roll-off (RoRo) and non-RoRo vessels plying the Roxas-Caticlan route, as well as to smaller passenger/cargo boats plying the Roxas-Romblon route;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the said Port serves as an exit/entry point of transport along Panay-Mindoro harbour; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to define the Port zone of Roxas for the planning, development, financing, and operation of said Port with the objective of promoting development through the dispersal of industries and commercial activities throughout the different regions.
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENlGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** Port of Roxas. The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Roxas situated in Barangay Dangay, Municipality of Roxas, Province of Oriental Mindoro, is hereby delineated and established, particularly described as follows:
>
> Beginning at a point marked 1 on the plan, being N. 81 deg. 45' W., 296.74 m. from BM located at the back-up area beside the weigh bridge of the Port of Roxas, Oriental Mindoro, thence:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | N. | 33 deg. | 07' | E., | 201.07 m. | to point 2; |
> | N. | 36 deg. | 30' | E., | 17.89 m. | to point 3; |
> | N. | 43 deg. | 07' | E., | 225.62 m. | to point 4; |
> | S. | 57 deg. | 00' | E., | 800.00 m. | to point 5; |
> | S. | 31 deg. | 45' | W., | 776.31 m. | to point 6; |
> | N. | 57 deg. | 00' | W., | 850.00 m. | to point 7; |
> | N. | 14 deg. | 39' | E., | 30.95 m. | to point 8; |
> | N. | 23 deg. | 01' | E., | 6.86 m. | to point 9; |
> | N. | 32 deg. | 11' | E., | 35.64 m. | to point 10; |
> | N. | 51 deg. | 15' | E., | 46.49 m. | to point 11; |
> | N. | 44 deg. | 17' | E., | 9.07 m. | to point 12; |
> | N. | 39 deg. | 04' | E., | 7.59 m. | to point 13; |
> | N. | 37 deg. | 40' | E., | 23.94 m. | to point 14; |
> | N. | 35 deg. | 35' | E., | 34.22 m. | to point 15; |
> | N. | 21 deg. | 01' | E., | 71.26 m. | to point 16; |
> | N. | 17 deg. | 20' | E., | 11.54 m. | to point 17; |
> | N. | 23 deg. | 31' | E., | 28.82 m. | to point 18; |
> | N. | 42 deg. | 56' | E., | 30.91 m. | to point 19; |
> | N. | 32 deg. | 00' | E., | 5.46 m. | to point of beginning, |
>
> Containing an area of SIX HUNDRED FIFTY-TWO THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED SIXTY (652,860) SQUARE METERS, more or less.
>
> **SECTION 2.** *PPA Jurisdiction.* The Roxas Port zone, as delineated, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the PPA, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development, and utilization of the port.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Repealing Clause.* All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Separability Clause.* If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
>
> **SECTION 5.** *Effectivity.* This Order shall take effect immediately.1âwphi1
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 14th day of February, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Fourteen.
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
