# Republic Act No. 4116

**An Act to Amend Section Nine Hundred Twenty-Five of the Revised Administrative Code in Order to Fix a Period for the Opening of the School Year, and for Other Purposes**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 4116
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1964/ra_4116_1964.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 4116**
>
> **An Act to Amend Section Nine Hundred Twenty-Five of the Revised Administrative Code in Order to Fix a Period for the Opening of the School Year, and for Other Purposes**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section nine hundred twenty-five of the Revised Administrative Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 925. *School Year and School Holidays.* -The school year for public and private schools shall consist of not less than forty weeks.1âшphi1 The opening date shall be fixed by the Secretary of Education, but it shall not be earlier than the first day of June nor later than the last day of July of each year: *Provided,* However, That for the school year 1964-1965, the school year calendar prescribed by the Secretary of Education shall be observed; but for the school year 1965-1966, and thereafter, the opening date shall be within the period fixed by this Act. The long school vacation period shall likewise be fixed by the Secretary of Education, taking into consideration the convenience of the pupils and their parents, and the special climatic conditions prevailing during said period: *Provided,* That the dates established for the school vacation shall not be changed oftener than once every five years without prior public hearing properly advertised in newspapers of general circulation and/or announced by the local authorities. Any order of the Secretary of Education changing the long school vacation period may be appealed to the National Board of Education by any school authority or parent or students and shall not be enforced pending such appeal.
> >
> > "In addition to the legal holidays, the Secretary of Education may authorize the observance by the public and private schools of other special school holidays to be designated by him."
>
> **Section 2.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 20, 1964.
>
>
>
