# Republic Act No. 4314

**An Act Creating Certain Barrios in the City of Iligan**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 4314
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1965/ra_4314_1965.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 4314**
>
> An Act Creating Certain Barrios in the City of Iligan
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The following sitios in the City of Iligan are hereby converted into barrios of said city, to wit:
>
> 1. The sitio of Mahayahay, to be known as the Barrio of Mahayahay;
>
> 2. The sitio of Abuno, to be known as the Barrio of Abuno;
>
> 3. The sitio of Pala-o, to be known as the Barrio of Pala-o;
>
> 4. The sitio of Tubod, to be known as the Barrio of Tubod;
>
> 5. The sitio of Puga-an, to be known as the Barrio of Puga-an;
>
> 6. The sitio of Tipanoy, to be known as the Barrio of Tipanoy;
>
> 7. The sitio of Tambacan, to be known as the Barrio of Tambacan;
>
> 8. The sitio of Bonbonon, to be known as the Barrio of Bonbonon;
>
> 9. The sitio of Bunawan, to be known as the Barrio of Bunawan;
>
> 10. The sitio of Digkila-an, to be known as the Barrio of Digkila-an;
>
> 11. The sitio of Hinaplanon, to be known as the Barrio of Hinaplanon;
>
> 12. The sitio of Mandulog, to be known as the Barrio of Mandulog;
>
> 13. The sitio of Sta. Filomena, to be known as the Barrio of Sta. Filomena;
>
> 14. The sitio of Cabacsanan, to be known as the Barrio of Cabacsanan;
>
> 15. The sitio of Sta. Elena, to be known as the Barrio of Sta. Elena;
>
> 16. The sitio of Upper Tominobo, to be known as the Barrio of Upper Tominobo;
>
> 17. The sitio of Kiwalan, to be known as the Barrio of Kiwalan;
>
> 18. The sitio of Dalipuga, to be known as the Barrio of Dalipuga;
>
> 19. The sitio of Rogongon, to be known as the Barrio of Rogongon;
>
> 20. The sitio of Saray, to be known as the Barrio of Saray;
>
> 21. The sitio of Maria Cristina, to be known as the Barrio of Maria Cristina;
>
> 22. The sitio of Tominobo Proper, to be known as the Barrio of Tominobo Proper;
>
> 23. The sitio of Mainit, to be known as the Barrio of Mainit; and
>
> 24. The sitio of Suarez, to be known as the Barrio of Suarez.
>
> **Section 2.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 19, 1965.
>
>
>
