# Republic Act No. 4073

**An Act Further Liberalizing the Treatment of Leprosy by Amending and Repealing Certain Sections of the Revised Administrative Code**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 4073
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1964/ra_4073_1964.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 4073**
>
> **An Act Further Liberalizing the Treatment of Leprosy by Amending and Repealing Certain Sections of the Revised Administrative Code**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Sections one thousand fifty-eight and one thousand fifty-nine of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, are further amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 1058. *Persons afflicted with leprosy not to be segregated.* -Except when certified by the Secretary of Health or his authorized representatives that the stage of the disease requires institutional treatment, no persons afflicted with leprosy shall be confined in a leprosarium: *Provided,* That such person shall be treated in any government skin clinic, rural health unit or by a duly licensed physician.£a⩊phi£
> >
> > "Sec. 1059. *Confinement and treatment in sanitarium when necessary.* -Whenever a person afflicted with leprosy shall have developed the disease to such stage as to require institutional treatment and the leprosy officer shall so certify, the said person shall forthwith be sent to a government operated sanitarium and be treated therein until such time as the Secretary of Health or his authorized representative decides that institutional treatment is no longer necessary."
>
> **Section 2.** Sections one thousand sixty to one thousand seventy-one, inclusive, of the same Code, as amended, are hereby repealed.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 18, 1964.
>
>
>
