# Republic Act No. 9461

**AN ACT NAMING THE CIRCUMFERENTIAL ROAD CONNECTING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF VILLABA, TABANGO, SAN ISIDRO, CALUBIAN AND LEYTE-LEYTE AS MARCELINO R. VELOSO NATIONAL HIGHWAY**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9461
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2007/ra_9461_2007.html)

---

> Thirteenth Congress
>
> Third Special Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the nineteenth day of February, two thousand seven.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 9461             May 15, 2007**
>
> **AN ACT NAMING THE CIRCUMFERENTIAL ROAD CONNECTING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF VILLABA, TABANGO, SAN ISIDRO, CALUBIAN AND LEYTE-LEYTE AS MARCELINO R. VELOSO NATIONAL HIGHWAY**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** This Act shall be known as the **"*Marcelino R. Veloso National Highway Act*"**.
>
> **Sec. 2.** The circumferential road connecting the municipalities of Villaba, Tabango, San Isidro, Calubian and Leyte-Leyte is hereby named and shall be known as the Marcelino R. Veloso National Highway, after the late Majority Floor Leader Marcelino R. Veloso, to honor him and in recognition of his services to his country and people.
>
> **Sec. 3.** The proper government agencies are hereby directed to implement this Act.
>
> **Sec. 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **MANNY VILLAR** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
