# Republic Act No. 9360

**AN ACT CREATING ANOTHER CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA SIBUGAY, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED EIGHTY-NINE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-THREE, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE CHARTER OF THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA SIBUGAY**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9360
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2006/ra_9360_2006.html)

---

> Thirteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand six.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 9360             October 26, 2006**
>
> **AN ACT CREATING ANOTHER CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA SIBUGAY, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED EIGHTY-NINE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-THREE, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE CHARTER OF THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA SIBUGAY**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** Section 7 of Republic Act No. 8973 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "SEC. 7. *Congressional District.* - The present Third District of the Province of Zamboanga del Sur shall constitute the Province of Zamboanga Sibugay which shall be divided into two (2) congressional districts as follows:
>
> "District I - Buug, Diplahan, Malangas, Imelda, Alicia, Mabuhay, Olutanga, Talusan and Payao.
>
> "District II - Siay, Kabasalan, Naga, Ipil, Titay, R.T. Lim and Tungawan.
>
> "The Province of Zamboanga del Sur shall retain the two (2) legislative districts as follows:
>
> "District I - Pagadian City, Labangan, Tukuran, Aurora, Molave, Mahayag, Dumingag, Suminot, Midsalip, Ramon Magsaysay, Tambulig, Josefina.
>
> "District II - Bayog, Lakewood, Kumalarang, Tigbao, Dumalinao, Guipos, San Miguel, Lapuyan, Margosatubig, Dinas, San Pablo, Tabina, Dimataling, Vincenzo Sagun, Pitogo."
>
> **SEC. 2.** All laws, executive orders, regulations or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **SEC. 3.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **MANNY VILLAR** President of the Senate | **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
