# Republic Act No. 9240

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE LAS PIÑAS DISTRICT HOSPITAL INTO A MEDICAL CENTER TO BE KNOWN AS THE LAS PIÑAS GENERAL HOSPITAL AND SATELLITE TRAUMA CENTER AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9240
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2004/ra_9240_2004.html)

---

> Twelfth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eight day of July, two thousand and three.*
>
> **Republic Act No. 9240             February 10, 2004**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE LAS PIÑAS DISTRICT HOSPITAL INTO A MEDICAL CENTER TO BE KNOWN AS THE LAS PIÑAS GENERAL HOSPITAL AND SATELLITE TRAUMA CENTER AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** The Las Piñas District Hospital in Las Piñas City is hereby converted into a medical center to be known as the Las Piñas General Hospital and Satellite Trauma Center.
>
> **SEC. 2.** The bed capacity of the Las Piñas District Hospital shall be increased from fifty (50) to two hundred (200) beds: Provided, That the increase shall be done gradually over a three (3)-year period, starting from the year 2004 until the year 2006: Provided, further, That for every year, fifty (50) beds shall be added to the hospital.
>
> **SEC. 3.** The Secretary of Health shall immediately include in the Department's program the implementation of this Act. The funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **SEC. 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
>
>
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **FRANKLIN DRILON** President of the Senate | **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
