# Republic Act No. 9059

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE LAS NIEVES NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - MANINGALAO ANNEX FROM THE LAS NIEVES NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN LAS NIEVES, AGUSAN DEL NORTE AND CONVERTING THE SAME INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE MANINGALAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9059
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2001/ra_9059_2001.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9059       April 04, 2001**
>
> AN ACT SEPARATING THE LAS NIEVES NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - MANINGALAO ANNEX FROM THE LAS NIEVES NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN LAS NIEVES, AGUSAN DEL NORTE AND CONVERTING THE SAME INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE MANINGALAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Las Nieves National High School -Maningalao Annex is hereby separated from the Las Nieves National High School in Las Nieves, Agusan del Norte and converted into an independent national high school to be known as the Maningalao National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
>
> **Section 3.** All personnel, records, assets and liabilities of the Las Nieves National High School -Maningalao Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Maningalao National High School.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary for the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Las Nieves National High School -Maningalao Annex. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continuous operation and maintenance of the Maningalao National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** Republic Act No. 8274 otherwise known as "An Act Converting the Maningalao Barangay High School in Las Nieves, Agusan del Norte into a National High School, and Appropriating Funds Therefor" is hereby repealed.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **AQUILINO Q. PIMENTEL, JR.** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on June 7, 2000 and February 5, 2001, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LUTGARDO B. BARBO** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
>
>
> Approved: APR 04, 2001
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
