# Republic Act No. 9177

**AN ACT DECLARING THE FIRST DAY OF SHAWWAL, THE TENTH MONTH OF THE ISLAMIC CALENDAR, A NATIONAL HOLIDAY FOR THE OBSERVANCE OF EIDUL FITR AND THE TENTH DAY OF ZHULD HIJJA. THE TWELFTH MONTH OF THE ISLAMIC CALENDAR, A REGIONAL HOLIDAY IN THE AUTOMNOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (ARMM) FOR THE OBSERVANCE OF <i>EIDUL ADHA</I>, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 26, CHAPTER 7 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 292. OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9177
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2002/ra_9177_2002.html)

---

> Twelfth Congress
>
> Second Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second day of July, two thousand two.*
>
> **Republic Act No. 9177
>
> AN ACT DECLARING THE FIRST DAY OF *SHAWWAL*, THE TENTH MONTH OF THE ISLAMIC CALENDAR, A NATIONAL HOLIDAY FOR THE OBSERVANCE OF *EIDUL FITR* AND THE TENTH DAY OF *ZHULD HIJJA.* THE TWELFTH MONTH OF THE ISLAMIC CALENDAR, A REGIONAL HOLIDAY IN THE AUTOMNOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (ARMM) FOR THE OBSERVANCE OF *EIDUL ADHA*, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 26, CHAPTER 7 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 292. OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled.*
>
> **Section 1.** The first day of *Shawwal*, the tenth month of the Islamic calendar, is hereby declared a national holiday for the observance of *Eidul Fitr*, and the tenth day of *Zhul Hijja*, the twelfth month of the Isalamic calendar is hereby delared a regional holiday in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) for the observance of *Eidul Adha. Eidul Fitr* is the first day marking the end of the thirty (30)-day fasting period of *Ramadhan Eidul Adha* is a tenth day in the month of *Hajj* or Islamic Pilgrimage to Mecca wherein Muslims pay homage to Abraham's supreme act of sacrifice and signifies mankind's obedience to God.
>
> The approximate date of these Islamic holidays may be determined in accordance with the Islamic calendar (*Hijra*) or the lunar calendar, or upon Islamic astronomical calculations, whichever is possible or convenient.
>
> **Section 2**. Section 26, Chapter 7 of Executive Order No 292, otherwise known as the Revised Administrative Code of 1987 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> Sec. 26. *Regular Holidays and Nationwide Special Days* (1) Unless otherwise modified by law, order or proclamation, the following regular holidays and special days shall observed in the country.
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | a) | Regular Holidays | |
> | New Year's Day | - January 1 |
> | Maundy Thursday | - Movable Date |
> | Good Friday | - Movable Date |
> | Eidul Fitr | - Movable Date |
> | Araw ng Kagitingan (Bataan and Corregidor Day) | - April 9 |
> | Labor Day | - May 1 |
> | Independence Day | - June 12 |
> | National Heroes Day | - Last Sunday of August |
> | Bonifacio Day | - November 30 |
> | Christmas Day | - December 25 |
> | Rizal Day | - December 30 |
> | b) | Nationwide Special Holidays | |
> | All Saints Day | - November 1 |
> | Last Day of the Year | - December 31 |
>
> *Provided, however* That *Eidul Adha* shall be celebrated as a regional holiday in Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao."
>
> **Section 3.** The implementation of this Act shall be under the supervision of the Office of Muslim Affairs (OMA) which shall promulgate the rules and regulations pursuant to the provisions of this Act. The *Grand Mufti* may submit his suggestion relative to said rules and regulations for consideration by the Office of Muslim Affairs (OMA)
>
> **Section 4.** All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, issuances, rules and regulations, and any part thereof, which are inconsistent with the provision of this Act, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)days after its complete publication in at least two(2) national newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | Sgd. **FRANKILN M. DRILON** *President of the Senate* | Sgd. **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* |
>
> This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 4373 and Senate Bill No. 2026 was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on September 2, 2002 and August 6, 2002, Respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | Sgd. **OSCAR G. YABES** *Secretary of the Senate* | Sgd. **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** *Secretary General House of Representatives* |
>
> Approved November 13, 2002
>
> Sgd. **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
