# Republic Act No. 9424

**AN ACT CREATING FOUR ADDITIONAL METROPOLITAN TRIAL COURT BRANCHES IN THE CITY OF MARIKINA, NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 27 OF BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE JUDICIARY REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1980, AS AMENDED, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9424
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2007/ra_9424_2007.html)

---

> Thirteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand six.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9424             April 10, 2007**
>
> **AN ACT CREATING FOUR ADDITIONAL METROPOLITAN TRIAL COURT BRANCHES IN THE CITY OF MARIKINA, NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 27 OF BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE JUDICIARY REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1980, AS AMENDED, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** Section 27, Chapter III of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, otherwise known as the "Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980", as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
>
> "SEC. 27. *Metropolitan Trial Courts of the National Capital Region.* - There shall be a Metropolitan Trial Court in the National Capital Region, to be known as the Metropolitan Trial Court of Metro Manila, which shall be composed of eighty-six (86) branches. There shall be:
>
> "x x x
>
> Six branches for Marikina with seats thereat;
>
> "x x x."
>
> **SEC. 2.** The Supreme Court shall assign the additional four branches of the Metropolitan Trial Court in the City of Marikina with seats thereat.
>
> **SEC. 3.** The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, in coordination with the Secretary of the Department of Justice, shall immediately include in the Court's program the operationalization of four additional branches of the Metropolitan Trial Court for the City of Marikina, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **SEC. 4.** The Supreme Court shall issue the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act and if warranted, the realignment of the seats of existing branches and their territorial jurisdictions.
>
> **SEC. 5. *Repealing Clause.*** All geneal and special laws, acts, decrees, executive orders, proclamations and administrative regulations or part or parts thereof which are inconsistent with any provision of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **SEC. 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **MANNY VILLAR** President of the Senate | **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
