# Republic Act No. 9373

**AN ACT CREATING TWO ADDITIONAL REGIONAL TRIAL COURT BRANCHES IN THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE TO BE STATIONED IN THE CITY OF TACLOBAN AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 14 PARAGRAPH (I) OF BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE JUDICIARY REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1980, AS AMENDED, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9373
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2007/ra_9373_2007.html)

---

> Thirteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand six.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9373             March 06, 2007**
>
> **AN ACT CREATING TWO ADDITIONAL REGIONAL TRIAL COURT BRANCHES IN THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE TO BE STATIONED IN THE CITY OF TACLOBAN AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 14 PARAGRAPH (I) OF BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE JUDICIARY REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1980, AS AMENDED, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** Section 14, paragraph (i) of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, otherwise known as the "Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980", as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
>
> "SEC. 14. *Regional Trial Courts.*
>
> "x x x
>
> "(e) Forty-three Regional Trial Judges shall be commissioned for the Eight Judicial Region.
>
> There shall be:
>
> "x x x
>
> "Nineteen branches with seats thereat for the Province of Leyte, the Province of Biliran, and the cities of Ormoc and Tacloban, with seats at Tacloban City, Abuyog, Calubian, Ormoc City, Carigara, Baybay, Burauen, Naval, Palompon, Hilongos, and Caibiran:
>
> "x x x."
>
> **SEC. 2.** The Supreme Court shall assign the two additional branches of the regional trial court in the City of Tacloban, Province of Leyte in accordance with this Act.
>
> **SEC. 3.** The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, in coordination with the Secretary of the Department of Justice, shall immediately include in the court's program the operationalization of the additional regional trial court branches in the Province of Leyte, with station at the City of Tacloban, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **SEC. 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **MANNY VILLAR** President of the Senate | **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
