# Republic Act No. 9144

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE ANDRES BONIFACIO ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN THE CITY OF MANDALUYONG INTO AN INTEGRATED SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE ANDRES BONIFACIO INTEGRATED SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9144
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2001/ra_9144_2001.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9144       July 30, 2001**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE ANDRES BONIFACIO ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN THE CITY OF MANDALUYONG INTO AN INTEGRATED SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE ANDRES BONIFACIO INTEGRATED SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Andres Bonifacio Elementary School in the City of Mandaluyong is hereby converted into an integrated school to be known as the Andres Bonifacio Integrated School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall prescribe the necessary rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall immediately include in its program the operationalization of the Andres Bonifacio Integrated School, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current appropriations of the Andres Bonifacio Elementary School and thereafter in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect immediately upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **AQUILINO Q. PIMENTEL JR.** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 28, 2000 and June 5, 2001, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LUTGARDO B. BARBO** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
>
>
> Approved: JUL 30 2001
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
