# Republic Act No. 9145

**AN ACT TO RECLASSIFY A PORTION OF THE LAND UNDER CADASTRAL SURVEY 800-D, MODULE 2, PROJECT NO. 1-LC MAP 203 IN BARANGAY SANTA MONICA, PUERTO PRINCESA CITY, PROVINCE OF PALAWAN AS AGRICULTURAL LAND OPEN TO DISPOSITION**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9145
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2001/ra_9145_2001.html)

---

> Eleventh Congress
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9145       July 30, 2001**
>
> AN ACT TO RECLASSIFY A PORTION OF THE LAND UNDER CADASTRAL SURVEY 800-D, MODULE 2, PROJECT NO. 1-LC MAP 203 IN BARANGAY SANTA MONICA, PUERTO PRINCESA CITY, PROVINCE OF PALAWAN AS AGRICULTURAL LAND OPEN TO DISPOSITION
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** That portion of the territory of Barangay Sta. Monica in the City of Puerto Princesa, Province of Palawan, consisting of nine hundred eighty-two hectares and five thousand six hundred sixty centares of land under cadastral survey 800-D, module 2, classified as timber land under Project No. 1-LC Map 203, is hereby reclassified as agricultural land, open to disposition, except that portion covered by Presidential Proclamation No. 16, dated September 11, 1998.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources shall issue all the necessary orders, rules and circulars to implement the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **AQUILINO Q. PIMENTEL JR.** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 28, 2001 and March 19, 2001, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LUTGARDO B. BARBO** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO NAZARENO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
>
>
> Approved: JUL 30 2001
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
