# Republic Act No. 9323

**AN ACT RECLASSIFYING A PARCEL OF TIMBERLAND LOCATED IN BARANGAY ATABAY, MUNICIPALITY OF HILONGOS, PROVINCE OF LEYTE, AS ALIENABLE OR DISPOSABLE LAND FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER PRODUCTIVE PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9323
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2004/ra_9323_2004.html)

---

> Twelfth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eight day of July, two thousand and three.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 9323**
>
> **AN ACT RECLASSIFYING A PARCEL OF TIMBERLAND LOCATED IN BARANGAY ATABAY, MUNICIPALITY OF HILONGOS, PROVINCE OF LEYTE, AS ALIENABLE OR DISPOSABLE LAND FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER PRODUCTIVE PURPOSES**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The parcel of timberland located in Barangay Atabay, Municipality of Hilongos, Province of Leyte, identified under Hilongos Cadastre, CAD. 566-, Case 1, CM 10 22’N 124 44’ E Sections 1 and 2 per Land Classification Map No. 2994, Block D, Timberland Leyte Project No. 18, certified on February 22, 1982 per LC Map No. 829 dated September 25, 1929 of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources is hereby declared as alienable or disposable land for residential, commercial, industrial or other productive purposes.
>
> With a total area of twenty-one (21) hectares and six thousand eight hundred ninety (6,890) square meters, more or less, said parcel of land is more particularly described as follows:
>
> Tie Line: From BLLM No. 1, 566-D, Hilongos, Leyte Cadastre to corner 1 is S. 80-18 W., 448.51 meters.
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | 1 - 2 | S. 26 – 16 E. | 218.91 m. |
> | 2 - 3 | S. 50 – 13 W. | 177.96 m. |
> | 3 - 4 | N. 45 – 03 W. | 248.07 m. |
> | 4 - 5 | N. 52 – 50 W. | 250.91 m. |
> | 5 – 6 | N. 57 – 30 W. | 306.34 m. |
> | 6 – 7 | N. 48 – 49 W. | 160.18 m. |
> | 7 – 8 | N. 55 – 20 E. | 81.21 m. |
> | 8 – 9 | N. 80 – 42 E. | 157.33 m. |
> | 9 – 10 | S. 53 – 59 E. | 224.66 m. |
> | 10 – 11 | N. 81 – 50 E. | 163.38 m. |
> | 11 – 1 | N. 42 – 31 E. | 339.51 m. |
>
> **Section 2.** Within six (6) months following the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources shall promulgate the rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.chan robles virtual law library
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in the Official Gazette or two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **FRANKLIN DRILON** President of the Senate | **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
