# Republic Act No. 9444

**AN ACT DECLARING THE ATULAYAN ISLAND OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAGÑAY, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR AS A TOURIST ZONE**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9444
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2007/ra_9444_2007.html)

---

> Thirteenth Congress
>
> Third Special Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the nineteenth day of February, two thousand seven.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 9444             May 9, 2007**
>
> **AN ACT DECLARING THE ATULAYAN ISLAND OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAGÑAY, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR AS A TOURIST ZONE**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** This Act hereby declares the Atulayan Island of the Municipality of Sagñay, Province of Camarines Sur as a National Tourism zone.
>
> **Sec. 2.** Until comprehensive legislation rationalizing the national tourism program is adopted, the following principles shall govern the planning, development, promotion and management of this tourism zone:
>
> (a) The Department of Tourism (DOT) and its attached agencies, and the Partido Development Administration (PDA) shall coordinate in the formulation of a tourism development plan for the tourism zone: *Provided*, That said plan is consistent with, or may be integrated into, the national tourism master plan of the DOT;
>
> (b) The plan shall protect and enhance the natural features and cultural heritage of the tourism zone, while providing sustainable economic opportunities for the local community;
>
> (c) The PDA and the relevant municipalities shall utilize their powers provided under Republic Act No. 7820, as amended, and the Local Government Code, respectively, to implement and enforce the tourism development plan;
>
> (d) The DOT and its attached agencies may provide necessary technical and financial assistance for the development of tourism infrastructure and skills development while endeavoring, when practicable, to promote the tourism zone, both locally and internationally; and
>
> (e) The DOT, the PDA and the relevant municipalities shall create a forum by which the private sector, nongovernment organizations and other interest groups can interact with one another and the government to create an atmosphere that shall encourage investment and the development of a culture of tourism.
>
> **Sec. 3.** The DOT, in consultation with the PDA and the local government concerned, shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations, and enter into agreements to implement this Act.
>
> **Sec. 4.** This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days of completion of its publication.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **MANNY VILLAR** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
