# Republic Act No. 9376

**AN ACT CREATING FIVE ADDITIONAL METROPOLITAN TRIAL COURT BRANCHES FOR THE CITY OF PARAÑAQUE, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 27 OF BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE JUDICIARY REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1980, AS AMENDED, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9376
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2007/ra_9376_2007.html)

---

> Thirteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand six.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9376             March 06, 2007**
>
> **AN ACT CREATING FIVE ADDITIONAL METROPOLITAN TRIAL COURT BRANCHES FOR THE CITY OF PARAÑAQUE, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 27 OF BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE JUDICIARY REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1980, AS AMENDED, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** Section 27 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "SEC. 27. *Metropolitan Trial Courts of the National Capital Region.* - There shall be a Metropolitan Trial Court in the National Capital Region, to be known as the Metropolitan Trial Court of Metro Manila, which, shall be composed of eighty-seven (87) branches. There shall be:
>
> "x x x
>
> "Seven branches for Parañaque with seats thereat.
>
> "x x x."
>
> **SEC. 2.** The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, in coordination with the Secretary of the Department of Justice, shall immediately include in the court's program the operationalization of the additional metropolitan trial court branches in the City of Parañaque, Metro Manila, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **SEC. 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **MANNY VILLAR** President of the Senate | **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
