# GR-173088

**REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES VS. IMPERIAL CREDIT CORPORATION**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES VS. IMPERIAL CREDIT CORPORATION
- **Ponente**: Tinga, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2008/jun2008/gr_173088_2008.html)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> **SUPREME COURT**
> Manila
>
> **SECOND DIVISION**
>
> **G.R. No. 173088             June 25, 2008**
>
> **REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES,** petitioner,
>
> vs.
> **IMPERIAL CREDIT CORPORATION,** respondent.
>
> **D E C I S I O N**
>
> **TINGA, *J.*:**
>
> This is a petition for review on certiorari under Rule 45 of the 1997 Rules of Court, assailing the Decision1 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CV No. 78240. The Court of Appeals’ Decision affirmed the Decision of the Regional Trial Court (RTC), Branch 74, Antipolo City which granted respondent’s application for land registration in LRC Case No. 00-2493.
>
> The following factual antecedents are matters of record.
>
> Herein respondent Imperial Credit Corporation is a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the Philippines. On 07 March 1966, respondent purchased from a certain Jose Tajon a parcel of land situated in Barrio Colaique (now Barangay San Roque), Antipolo City, Rizal for the sum of P17,986.00 as evidenced by a Deed of Sale with Mortgage. Upon full payment of the balance of P1,909.00 through judicial consignation, ownership of the property was consolidated in the name of respondent and the mortgage constituted thereon released in December 1997. The property was thereafter privately surveyed under PSU-178075 and approved on 25 January 2000.
>
> On 14 February 2000, respondent filed before the RTC of Antipolo City an application for registration of a parcel of land, as shown on Plan PSU-178075 containing an area of 8,993 square meters. The application was docketed as LRC Case No. 00-2493 and raffled off to Branch 74 of said RTC. The application alleged, among others, that respondent "subrogated former owner Jose Tajon, who has been in open, continuous, exclusive and notorious possession and occupation of the parcel of land, being a part of the alienable and disposable lands of the public domain, under a bona fide claim of ownership since 12 June 1945, by virtue of Deed of Sale with Mortgage executed on 07 March 1966,
>
> After respondent presented evidence establishing the jurisdiction facts, the RTC issued an order of general default against the whole world allowing respondent to present its evidence *ex parte*.
>
> At the hearing, Ricardo Santos, respondent’s legal researcher and duly authorized attorney-in-fact, testified on the fact of respondent’s actual possession through its caretaker, Teodisia Palapus, who had been overseeing said property since its acquisition from Jose Tajon. Palapus also corroborated Santos’ testimony and added that except for some trespassers, no one else had laid possessory claim on the property. Aside from the transfer documents, the other documentary evidence submitted consisted of a 1993 tax declaration, the tracing cloth plan, survey description, a certification from the Land Management Sector in lieu of the geodetic engineer’s certificate and the report by the Community Environment and Natural Resources Office that the property falls within the alienable and disposable zone.
>
> On 21 November 2002, the RTC rendered judgment granting respondent’s application for registration. The dispositive portion of the Decision reads:
>
> WHEREFORE, from the evidence presented both testimonial and documentary, the Court is satisfied that the applicant has a registerable title over the parcel of land applied for and after affirming the order of general default against the whole world, hereby adjudicates the parcel of land more specifically identified in Plan Psu 178075 containing an area of EIGHT THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED NINETY THREE (8,993) SQUARE METERS in favor of the applicant IMPERIAL CREDIT CORPORATION with business address at Unit 3-C-2, JMT Corporate Condominium, ADB Ave., Ortigas Center, Pasig City, Metro Manila.
>
> Once this decision becomes final, let an Order issue directing the Administrator of the Land Registration Authority, Quezon City, to issue the corresponding Decree of Registration.
>
> SO ORDERED.2
>
> Petitioner Republic of the Philippines, through the Office of the Solicitor General (OSG), seasonably appealed from the RTC’s Decision to the Court of Appeals, contending that respondent failed to present incontrovertible evidence that respondent and its predecessor-in-interest have been in open continuous, exclusive and notorious possession and occupation of the property since 12 June 1945 or earlier.
>
> The Court of Appeals rendered a Decision on 02 June 2006, dismissing the appeal by the OSG.
>
> Hence, the instant petition, assigning the lone error, to wit:
>
> THE COURT OF APPEALS ERRED IN AFFIRMING THE RTC DECISION WHICH GRANTED RESPONDENT’S APPLICATION FOR ORIGINAL REGISTRATION OF TITLE, HOLDING AS BASIS THEREOF PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (4) OF SECTION 14 OF PD 1529 ("THE PROPERTY REGISTRATION DECREE").3
>
> Petitioner argues that contrary to the Court of Appeals’ ruling that respondent was able to prove its claim under paragraphs (2) and (4) of Section 14, Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1529, respondent’s application for registration was actually based on paragraph (1) of Section 14, P.D. No. 1529, the conditions under which were not sufficiently established by respondent’s evidence. Although petitioner concedes that respondent was able to show that the land applied for has been declassified from the forest or timber zone and is an alienable public agricultural land, respondent’s evidence failed to satisfy the requirement under paragraph (1) of Section 14, P.D. No. 1529, that is, respondent’s possession and occupation of the property for the length of time and in the manner required by law.
>
> The petition is meritorious.
>
> Under the Regalian doctrine, the State is the source of any asserted right to ownership of land. This is premised on the basic doctrine that all lands not otherwise appearing to be clearly within private ownership are presumed to belong to the State. Any applicant for confirmation of imperfect title bears the burden of proving that he is qualified to have the land titled in his name.4
>
> The reckoning date under the Public Land Act for the acquisition of ownership of public lands is June 12, 1945 or earlier, and that evidence of possession from that date or earlier is essential for a grant of an application for judicial confirmation of imperfect title.5
>
> While a tax declaration by itself is not sufficient to prove ownership, it may serve as sufficient basis for inferring possession.6 However,
>
> WHEREFORE, the instant petition for review on certiorari is GRANTED and the Decision of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CV No. 78240 is REVERSED and SET ASIDE.
>
> **SO ORDERED**.
>
> **DANTE O. TINGA**
> Associate Justice
>
>
>
> WE CONCUR:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **LEONARDO A. QUISUMBING** Associate Justice Chairperson | |
> | **CONCHITA CARPIO MORALES** Associate Justice | **PRESBITERO J. VELASCO, JR.** Associate Justice |
> | **ARTURO D. BRION** Associate Justice | |
