# GR-156286

**MARITA C. BERNALDO VS. THE COURT OF APPEALS, ET AL.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: MARITA C. BERNALDO VS. THE COURT OF APPEALS, ET AL.
- **Ponente**: Leonardo-De Castro, J.
- **Division**: FIRST DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2008/aug2008/gr_156286_2008.html)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> **SUPREME COURT**
> Manila
>
> **FIRST DIVISION**
>
> **G.R. No. 156286             August 13, 2008**
>
> **MARITA C. BERNALDO,** petitioners,
>
> vs.
> **THE COURT OF APPEALS (CA), THE OMBUDMAN, and THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND HIGHWAYS (DPWH),** respondents.
>
> **D E C I S I O N**
>
> **LEONARDO-DE CASTRO, *J.*:**
>
> Marita C. Bernaldo filed aAt bar is a *Petition for Review on Certiorari* under Rule 45 of the Rules of Court, wherein petitioner Marita C. Bernaldo ("Bernaldo") assailing assailed the *Resolution*1 dated November, 13 2002 and the *Decision*2 dated January 31, 2002 of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. SP No. 65440 (the "Assailed Rulings"). The Aassailed Rrulings affirmed the *Order*[s]3 dated June 7, 2001 and December 26, 2000 of the Office of the Ombudsman in OMB-ADM-0-93-0411, finding petitioner Bernaldo administratively liable for "conduct grossly prejudicial to the best interest of the service" and ordering her suspension for a period of nine (9) months without pay and other benefits. The public respondents, through the Office of the Solicitor General, filed theirits *Comment*4 dated June 23, 2003. The petitioner responded with a her *Reply*5 dated November 6, 2003. The parties likewise filed their respective memoranda.
>
> The facts are culled from the records of the case.
>
> The Department of Public Works and Highways ("DPWH") had nine (9) river dredging projects in Bataan sometime in 1987 to 1988 which were duly awarded to various private contractors. Among these projects were the Channel Improvement of Calaguiman River in Samal, Bataan (the "Calaguiman River Project"); the Channel Improvement of Almacen River I in Hermosa, Bataan (the "Almacen River I Project"); and the Channel Improvement of Almacen River II also in Hermosa, Bataan (the "Almacen River II Project").
>
> Petitioner Bernaldo was the DPWH Region III Project Engineer of tThe Almacen River II Pproject was awarded toand L.J. Cruz Construction and was the contractor. The costcontract price of the said project was P 3,316,231.12. The contractor was allowed to commenced the projectwork on December 22, 1987 and it reported the project’sits completion on August 31, 1988. At the time of the reported completion, petitioner Bernaldo was the DPWH Region III Project Engineer for the Almacen River II Project. In a *Statement of Work Accomplished*6 (SWA) dated August 31, 1988 and a *Certificate of Final Inspection and Certificate of Final Acceptance*7 dated September 1, 1988, the Almacen River II Pproject was certified 100% completed "in accordance with the approved plans and specifications" by the contractor and the DPWH Region III Engineers, namely, Marita C. Project Engineer - Marita C. Bernaldo as the Project Engineer;, District Engineer - Adolfo M. Flores as the District Engineer;, Chief of Construction Division - Celestino R. Contreras, Chief of Maintenance Division - as the Chief of Construction Division; Angelito M. Twaño, as the Chief of Maintenance Division; Chief of Planning and Design Division - Augusto A. Mendoza as the Chief of Planning and Design Division,; Chief of Materials and Quality Control Division - Andrelito P. Tagorda, Assistant Regional Director - as the Chief of Materials and Quality Control Division; Regulo V. Fernandez, as the Assistant Regional Director; and Regional Director - Jose C. Pendoza (collectively, the "DPWH Region III Engineers") as the Regional Director. The contractor was eventually paid 93.58% of the contract pricecost.
>
> However, a contrary finding as to the accomplishment of works involving all three projects was reported by a Survey and Investigation Team of the Bureau of Design of the DPWH (the "Survery Team") composed of Felix V. Camaya, Eustacio Y. Cano, and Rogelio A. Hernandez (survey team). In its *Field Survey and Investigation Report*8 dated November 7, 1988, the Ssurvey Tteam indicated, among others, that the amount of work accomplished by L.J. Cruz Construction on the Almacen River II Pproject was only about 21% completed. Moreover, in a *Letter-Report*9 dated May 16, 1989 of DPWH Senior Civil Engineer Stephen L. David addressed to Special Investigator III Rafael R. Cabigao of the Office of the Ombudsman, Rafael R. Cabigao, the equipments utilized on the Almacen River II pProject waswere evaluated and it was stated therein disclosed that the same could not possibly accomplish the reported full completion of the said project.
>
> Based on the foregoing reports, the DPWH Region III Engineers connected with the Calaguiman River, Almacen River I, and Almacen River II Pprojects were all administratively charged for Falsification, Dishonesty, and Conduct Prejudicial to the Best Interest of the Service before the Administrative Adjudication Bureau (AAB) of the Office of the Ombudsman in docketed as OMB-ADM-0-93-0411. In theThe *Memorandum*,10 dated May 5, 1993 of Graft Investigation Officer (GIO) J. Celrin M. Macavinta of the OMB Task Force on Public Works and Highways, the allegations constituting the administrative charge are quoted as follows:contained the following findings:
>
> xXxx xxx xxx
>
> The report of the survey team and the analysis of Engr. David clearly established a clear case of overpayment. **The same also show conspiracy between and among the contractors and the concerned government engineers who allowed the overpayment by issuing certifications indicating that the contractors had completed the project 100%, when in truth and in fact, the contractors had barely accomplished anything.**
>
> Without the said false certifications, no payments could have been made to the conniving contractors. These falsified documents are:
>
> Xxxx xxx xxx
>
> ALMACEN RIVER PROJECT II
>
> 1. **The Statement of Work Accomplished showing that the project was 100% accomplished as of August 31, 1988. The document was certified to and verified correct by:**
>
> a. **MARITA C. BERNALDO – Project Engineer;**
>
> b. CELESTINO R. CONTRERAS – Chief, Construction Division;
>
> c. LEONARDO J. CRUZ – Contractor;
>
> d. ADOLFO M. FLORES – District Engineer;
>
> e. REGULO V. FERNANDEZ – Assistant Regional Director;
>
> f. JOSE C. PENDO\_ZA – Regional Director.
>
> 2. **The Certificate of Final Inspection.** This document certifies that the project was inspected on September 1, 1988 and was found 100% completed by:
>
> a. **MARITA C. BERNALDO – Project Engineer;**
>
> b. ANGELITO TWANO – Chief, Maintenance Division;
>
> c. AUGUSTO MENDOZA – Chief, Planning & Design Division;
>
> d. ANDRELITO TAGORDA – Chief, Materials & Quality Control Division;
>
> e. CELESTINO CONTRERAS – Chief, Construction Division; and
>
> f. ADOLFO FLORES – District Engineer.
>
> xXxx xxx xxx
>
> Based on the survey, the difference between the actual work accomplished and the total collections of the contractors in the three projects are itemized and computed as follows:
>
> xXxx xxx xxx
>
> ALMACEN RIVER PROJECT II
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | Amount actually   Accomplished | Amount Collected  by the Contractor | Difference (damage to the government) |
> | 21% or  P 733,320 | 93.58% or  P 3,267,755.61 | 72.58% or  P 2,534,435.61 |
