# Executive Order No. 565

**ATTACHING THE PROFESSIONAL REGULATION COMMISSION TO THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT FOR GENERAL DIRECTION AND COORDINATION.**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 565
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2006/eo_565_2006.html)

---

> **MALACAÑANG**
> Manila
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
>
>
> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO 565             September 11, 2006**
>
> **ATTACHING THE PROFESSIONAL REGULATION COMMISSION TO THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT FOR GENERAL DIRECTION AND COORDINATION**
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) was created pursuant to Republic Act (RA) No. 8981, otherwise known as the PRC Modernization Act of 2000;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 3 of RA No. 8981 provides that the PRC shall be attached to the Office of the President for general direction and coordination;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) is mandated, under Section 2 (1), Chapter 1, Title Vll, Book lll of Executive Order (EO) No. 292, otherwise known as the Administrative Code of 1987, to optimize the development and utilization of the country's manpower resources;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the DOLE is in a better position to exercise oversight functions over the PRC;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 20, Chapter 7, Title l, Book lll of EO No. 292 grants the President residual powers to reorganize the Executive Branch of government.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I GLORIA M. ARROYO,** President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby attach the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) to the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) for general direction and coordination.
>
> This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> **DONE** in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
>
>
> By the President:
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> *Executive Secretary*
>
>
>
