# Executive Order No. 563

**AMENDING SECTION 2 AND REPEALING SECTION 4 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 230 S. 2000 AUTHORIZING THE ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF A “SUPER GREEN LANE FACILITY” AT THE BUREAU OF CUSTOMS**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 563
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2006/eo_563_2006.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 563
>
> AMENDING SECTION 2 AND REPEALING SECTION 4 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 230 S. 2000 AUTHORIZING THE ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF A “SUPER GREEN LANE FACILITY” AT THE BUREAU OF CUSTOMS
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 230 dated 31 March 2000 authorized the establishment and maintenance of a “Super Green Lane (SGL) Facility” at the Bureau of Customs;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 4 of Executive Order No. 230 provides that the Secretary of Finance and the Commissioner of Customs shall issue rules and regulations to effectively implement this Order;
>
> **WHEREAS,** it is necessary to immediately implement the “Super Green Lane Facility” at the Bureau of Customs.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** Section 2 of Executive Order No. 230 dated 31 March 2000 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > “SECTION 2. *Trust Fund Creation.* – A Super Green Lane Trust Fund is hereby created and established which shall be sourced from the service fee charged for every shipment of qualified importers utilizing the Super Green Lane Facility. A Permanent Committee created under Section 45, Chapter 5, Book VI of Executive Order No. 292, otherwise known as the Administrative Code of 1987, shall monitor and evaluate the activities of the balances of the Trust Fund.”
>
> **SECTION 2.** Section 4 of Executive Order No. 230 dated 31 March 2000 is hereby repealed.
>
> **SECTION 3.** Failure to follow the directives in Executive Order No. 230, as herein amended, within thirty (30) days from effectivity of this Order shall subject concerned officials to administrative sanctions pursuant to existing laws, rules and regulations.
>
> **SECTION 4.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
> Source: Malacañang Records Office
> Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Executive Order Nos. : 501 – 600]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.
>
>
