# Executive Order No. 567

**DEVOLVING THE TAGUIG-PATEROS DISTRICT HOSPITAL FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO THE CITY OF TAGUIG**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 567
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2006/eo_567_2006.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 567
>
> DEVOLVING THE TAGUIG-PATEROS DISTRICT HOSPITAL FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO THE CITY OF TAGUIG
>
> WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 7842 approved on 16 December 1994 established the Taguig-Pateros District Hospital under the administration and supervision of the Department of Health (DOH);
>
> **WHEREAS,** under Republic Act No. 7160 otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, local government units (LGUs) shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions and responsibilities as are necessary, appropriate or incidental to efficient and effective provision of basic services and facilities which cover, among others, health services including secondary and tertiary hospitals;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the offices under the executive department;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** The administrative and supervision of Taguig-Pateros District Hospital is hereby devolved from the Department of Health to the City of Taguig.
>
> **SECTION 2.** All laws, issuances, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 3.** This Executive Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.1âwphi1
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
> Source: Malacañang Records Office
> Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Executive Order Nos. : 501 – 600]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.
>
>
