# Executive Order No. 557

**ESTABLISHING AN ANTI-RED TAPE TASK FORCE.**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 557
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2006/eo_557_2006.html)

---

> **MALACAÑANG**
> Manila
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
>
>
> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO 557             August 8, 2006**
>
> **ESTABLISHING AN ANTI-RED TAPE TASK FORCE**
>
> **WHEREAS,** one of the strategic measures for global competitiveness in the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan is to reduce red tape in all government agencies to reduce transactions costs;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Philippines, by the power vested in me by Constitution and the laws of the Philippines, do hereby order:
>
> 1. There is hereby established an Anti-Red Tape Task Force ("Task Force") with full-time members from the Presidential Management Staff, the Commission on Information and Communications Technology, the Department of Trade and Industry, the Export Development Council Secretariat, and the National Anti-Poverty Commission as members. The Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry shall likewise be invited to be send a representative who shall participate full-time in the activities of the Task Force.
>
> 2. The Secretary of Trade and Industry shall be the Chairman of the Task Force. There shall be a full-time operations officer coming from the Export Development Council Secretariat.
>
> 3. The Task Force shall handle the Anti-Red Tape Module of the forthcoming National Competitiveness Summit and shall be incorporated into the National Competitiveness Council to be established in the said Summit.
>
> 4. All executive issuances inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> 5. This Executive Order takes effect immediately.
>
> **Done** in the City of Manila, this 8th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
>
>
> By the President:
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> *Executive Secretary*
>
>
>
