# GR-250089

**PHILIPPINE HEALTH INSURANCE CORPORATION, PETITIONER, VS. COMMISSION ON AUDIT AND CHAIRPERSON MICHAEL G. AGUINALDO, RESPONDENTS**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: PHILIPPINE HEALTH INSURANCE CORPORATION, PETITIONER, VS. COMMISSION ON AUDIT AND CHAIRPERSON MICHAEL G. AGUINALDO, RESPONDENTS
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Resolution
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2021/nov2021/gr_250089_2021.html)

---

> **EN BANC**
>
> **[ G.R. No. 250089. November 09, 2021 ]**
>
> **PHILIPPINE HEALTH INSURANCE CORPORATION, PETITIONER, VS. COMMISSION ON AUDIT AND CHAIRPERSON MICHAEL G. AGUINALDO, RESPONDENTS.**
>
> **D E C I S I O N**
>
> **LOPEZ, J., *J.:***
>
> Before this Court is a Petition for *Certiorari*1 filed under Rule 64, in relation to Rule 65, of the Rules of Court, assailing: (1) Commission on Audit (COA) Decision No. 2015-4212 dated December 28, 2015, which affirmed the Notice of Disallowance (ND) No. 2013-01(12)3 dated May 13, 2013, disallowing certain allowances and benefits for 2012 granted to the officials and employees of the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (petitioner); and (2) COA en banc Resolution4 dated September 19, 2019, which denied petitioner's Motion for Reconsideration5 on Decision No. 2015-421 for lack of merit.
>
> **The Facts**
>
> Petitioner is a government-owned and -controlled corporation (GOCC), created pursuant to Republic Act (R.A.) No. 7875, as amended, otherwise known as The National Health Insurance Act of 1995. Its functions include the administration of the country's national health insurance program as well as the formulation and promulgation of policies for the sound administration of the said program.6 Respondent COA is a constitutionally-created body vested with the power, authority, and duty to examine, audit, and settle all accounts concerning the revenues, receipts, and expenditures, or uses of government funds and properties.7
>
> On May 13, 2013, the Audit Team Leader and Supervising Auditor of respondent COA's Team 2, Cluster 6, Corporate Governance Sector (CGS) issued ND No. 2013-01(12),8 disallowing the payments of different benefits and allowances granted to certain officers and employees of petitioner's Regional Office (RO) No. VIII for the year 2012 amounting to Fifty-Six Million Five Hundred Seventy-Seven Thousand Two Hundred Eighty-Six Pesos and Eighty-Eight Centavos (P56,577,286.88), to wit:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | Benefits/Allowances | Amount |
> | 1. Shuttle Service Allowance | P5,591,660.84 |
> | 2. Medical Mission and Critical Allowance | P264,635.52 |
> | 3. Birthday Gift | P1,568,176.22 |
> | 4. Welfare Support Allowance | P7,245,698.73 |
> | 5. Educational Assistance | P10,716,329.17 |
> | 6. Subsistence Allowance | P1,958,863.65 |
> | 7. Laundry Allowance | P195,886.35 |
