# GR-135786

**G.R. No. 135786**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: G.R. No. 135786
- **Ponente**: Austria-Martinez, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2004/jul2004/gr_135786_2004.html)

---

> SECOND DIVISION
>
> **G.R. No. 135786             July 23, 2004**
>
> **JOSE P. TAMBUNTING,** petitioner,
>
> vs.
> **COURT OF APPEALS, ESTANISLAWA PANER and HON. JUDGE LEAH S. DOMINGO,** respondents.
>
>
>
> D E C I S I O N
>
>
>
> **AUSTRIA-MARTINEZ, *J*.:**
>
> This refers to the petition for *certiorari* filed by Jose P. Tambunting assailing the decision1  promulgated by the Court of Appeals2  (CA for brevity) on September 24, 1998 which affirmed the Resolution dated July 17, 19973  issued by the Regional Trial Court, Branch 226, Quezon City (RTC for brevity), affirming with modification the Order4  of Branch 41, Metropolitain Trial Court, Quezon City (MTC for brevity), granting the issuance of an alias writ of execution.
>
> The factual background of the case is as follows:
>
> In the ejectment case5  filed by respondent against petitioner, parties entered into a Compromise Agreement,6  to wit:
>
> "COMPROMISE AGREEMENT"
>
> PARTIES, assisted by their respective undersigned counsels, to this Honorable Court, respectfully submit the following Compromise Agreement:
>
> 1.          The Defendant agrees to pay an increased rental from P12,589.05 to P19,000.00 per month effective upon the signing of this Compromise Agreement;
>
> 2.          That in addition to the foregoing, the amount of P22,000.00 representing additional rentals from March, 1990 to January, 1991 shall be paid in equal proportions by the Defendant to the Plaintiff within a period of one (1) year, both of which amounts shall be payable in advance not later than the first five (5) days of the month;
>
> 3.          This Lease agreement shall be effective for a period of one (1) year;
>
> 4.          Both parties respectively waive their other claim/counter claims in the above-entitled case;
>
> 5.          The parties agree that if any of the provisions of this Compromise agreement is violated by the Defendant, then execution shall issue on the basis of this agreement.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD) ESTANISLAWA PANER       Plaintiff | (SGD) JOSE TAMBUNTING  Defendant |
> | (SGD) ATTY. DANIEL T. SOLOMON       Counsel for the Defendant | (SGD) ATTY. PEDRO T. SANTOS, JR.  Counsel for the Plaintiff |
