# Republic Act No. 10240

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY BUENAVISTA, MUNICIPALITY OF CASTILLA, PROVINCE OF SORSOGON TO BE KNOWN AS BUENAVISTA NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10240
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2012/ra_10240_2012.html)

---

> Fifteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-three day of July, two thousand twelve.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10240**
>
> AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY BUENAVISTA, MUNICIPALITY OF CASTILLA, PROVINCE OF SORSOGON TO BE KNOWN AS BUENAVISTA NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** *Establishment of a National High School. –* There is hereby established, under the supervision of the Department of Education, a national high school in Barangay Buenavista, Municipality of Castilla, Province of Sorsogon to be known as Buenavista National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** *Appropriations.* – The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department’s program the operationalization of the Buenavista National High School, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** *Implementation. –* The Secretary of Education shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity. –* This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette.*
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives *was* finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on June 6, 2011 and July 24, 2012, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: OCT 29 2012
>
> **(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
