# Republic Act No. 10377

**AN ACT TRANSFERRING THE LOCATION OF THE LA UNION SECOND DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE FROM NAGUILIAN, LA UNION TO AGOO, LA UNION, AMENDING FOR THIS PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9033**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10377
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2013/ra_10377_2013.html)

---

> Fifteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand twelve.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10377**
>
> AN ACT TRANSFERRING THE LOCATION OF THE LA UNION SECOND DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE FROM NAGUILIAN, LA UNION TO AGOO, LA UNION, AMENDING FOR THIS PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9033
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section 1 of Republic Act No. 9033 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "SECTION 1. The Sub-District Engineering-Office located in Naguilian. La Union, under the supervision of the Department of Public Works and Highways, shall be converted into a regular engineering district to be known as the La Union Second Engineering District and is hereby relocated to Agoo, La Union."
>
> **Section 2.** *Repealing Clause.* – All laws or parts of any law, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 3.** *Effectivity Clause.* – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 24, 2012 and December 17, 2012, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: MAR 05 2013
>
> **(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
