# Republic Act No. 10347

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE EXTENSION OFFICE OF THE LAND TRANSPORTATION OFFICE (LTO) IN QUIRINO, MUNICIPALITY OF LUNA, APAYAO INTO A REGULAR LTO DISTRICT OFFICE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10347
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2012/ra_10347_2012.html)

---

> Fifteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-three day of July, two thousand twelve.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10347**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE EXTENSION OFFICE OF THE LAND TRANSPORTATION OFFICE (LTO) IN QUIRINO, MUNICIPALITY OF LUNA, APAYAO INTO A REGULAR LTO DISTRICT OFFICE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Apayao Extension Office of the Land Transportation Office (LTO) located in Quirino, Municipality of Luna, Apayao is hereby converted into a regular LTO District Office.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Transportation and Communications shall immediately include in the Department’s programs the operationalization of the LTO District Office in Quirino, Municipality of Luna, Apayao, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s appropriations of the Apayao LTO Extension Office. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** The Department of Transportation and Communications shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 3, 2011 and September 17, 2012, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: DEC 04 2012
>
> **(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
