# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 13

**RECONSTITUTING AND RENAMING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON THE PHILIPPINE NUCLEAR POWER PLANT AS PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON THE BATAAN NUCLEAR POWER PLANT**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 13
- **Date**: August 19, 1992
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1992/eo_13_1992.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 13, August 19, 1992 ]
>
> RECONSTITUTING AND RENAMING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON THE PHILIPPINE NUCLEAR POWER PLANT AS PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON THE BATAAN NUCLEAR POWER PLANT
>
> Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, **FIDEL V. RAMOS**, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 1 of Executive Order No. 315, s. of 1988, is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Section 1. *Name*- The Presidential Committee on the Philippine Nuclear Power Plant is hereby renamed The Presidential Committee on the Bataan Nuclear Power Plant and its structure, powers and functions are hereby defined as provided hereinbelow;"
>
> **Section 2.** Section 2 of Executive Order No. 315, s. of 1988, is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Section 2. *Composition* - The Committee shall be composed of a chairman to be appointed by the President and, in an ex-officio capacity, the Secretary of Finance as Vice-Chairman, the Secretary of Budget and Management, Secretary of Trade and Industry, Chairman of Presidential Commission on Good Government, Governor of Central Bank, Solicitor General, President of National Power Corporation, and President of the Philippine National Oil Company, as Members.
>
> **Section 3.** In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall assume all his functions and responsibilities.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 4.** *Compensation* - The Vice Chairman and all the members of the said committee shall not be entitled to any additional compensation in the discharge of their respective duties and functions as enumerated therein.
>
> **Section 5.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.
>
> (Sgd.) **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA**
> Senior Deputy Executive Secretary
>
>
>
