# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 502

**AMENDING LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 911, AS AMENDED, AND LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1093, AS AMENDED, GOVERNING THE ADMISSION TO AND/OR STAY IN THE COUNTRY OF TEMPORARY VISITORS WHO ARE HOLDERS OF HONGKONG-BRITISH, MACAO-PORTUGUESE, PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA OR TAIPEI PASSPORTS OR CERTIFICATES OF IDENTITY**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 502
- **Date**: January 08, 1992
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1992/eo_502_1992.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 502, January 08, 1992 ]
>
> AMENDING LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 911, AS AMENDED, AND LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1093, AS AMENDED, GOVERNING THE ADMISSION TO AND/OR STAY IN THE COUNTRY OF TEMPORARY VISITORS WHO ARE HOLDERS OF HONGKONG-BRITISH, MACAO-PORTUGUESE, PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA OR TAIPEI PASSPORTS OR CERTIFICATES OF IDENTITY
>
> WHEREAS, it is the declared policy of the Government to attract, promote and welcome foreign Investments and advanced technology and together with the tourism industry, make them active partners and positive instruments towards accelerated national development;
>
> **WHEREAS,** it is necessary to extend full support to government policies and programs designed to attract and induce foreign tourists and would-be investors and technocrats by removing, among other things, unnecessary barriers to their travel through the integration and simplification of travel regulations and procedures;
>
> **WHEREAS,** this goal may be achieved by the revision of existing rules,  regulations and procedures In the Issuance of visas and admission and stay of aliens in order to enable them to obtain visas and/or change admission status/classification with ease and speed;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the amendment of paragraph I(e) of LOI No. 911, as amended, and paragraph I(D) of LOI No. 1093, as amended, which prohibit the change of status from what is authorized for their entry without leaving the country for temporary visitors who are holders of Hongkong-Britlsh, Macao-Portuguese, People's Republic of China or Taipei  Passports or Certificates of Identity, by deleting said paragraphs therefrom so that these foreign nationals may now be allowed to change admission status or classification without the necessity of departing from the country and securing their visas from the proper Philippine Consulate/Office abroad.
>
> This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of January in the year of our lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.
>
> (Sgd.) **CORAZON C. AQUINO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
