# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 227

**ADJUSTING THE DIVIDEND RATES OF SELECTED GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND/OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS ON THEIR 1996 NET EARNINGS PURSUANT TO SECTION 5 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7656**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 227
- **Date**: April 03, 2000
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2000/eo_227_2000.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 227, April 03, 2000 ]
>
> ADJUSTING THE DIVIDEND RATES OF SELECTED GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND/OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS ON THEIR 1996 NET EARNINGS PURSUANT TO SECTION 5 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7656
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 1 of Republic Act No. 7656 provides that:
>
> > " Section 1. *Declaration of Policy.* It is hereby declared the policy of the state that in order for the National Government to realize additional revenues, government-owned and/or controlled corporations, without impairing their viability and the purposes for which they have been established, shall share a substantial amount of their net earnings to the National Government."
>
> **WHEREAS,** to support the viability and mandate of government-owned and/or controlled corporations (GOCCs), the liquidity, retained earnings position and medium-term plans and programs of these GOCCs were considered in the determination of the reasonable dividend rates of such corporations on their 1996 net earnings;
>
> **WHEREAS,** pursuant to Section 5 of RA 7656, the Secretary of Finance recommended the adjustment on the percentage of annual net earnings that shall be declared by various GOCCs in the interest of national economy and general welfare;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH E. ESTRADA,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** The percentage of net earnings to be declared and remitted by the following GOCCs as dividends to the National Government as provided for under Section 3 of Republic Act No. 7656 is adjusted from at least fifty percent (50%) to the rates specified hereunder:
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | 1. | Cebu Port Authority | 15% (cash) |
> | 2. | Land Bank of the Philippines | 30% (cash) |
> | 3. | Mactan Cebu International Airport Authority | 10% (cash) |
> | 4. | Manila International Airport Authority | 25% (cash) |
> | 5. | Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System | 30% (cash) |
> | 6. | National Electrification Administration | 15% (cash) |
> | 7. | National Power Corporation | 10% (cash) |
> | 8. | Philippine National Oil Company | 10% (cash) |
> | 9. | Philippine Retirement Authority | 30% (cash) |
> | 10. | PHIVIDEC Industrial Authority | 20% (cash) |
> | 11. | Public Estates Authority | 50% (cash) |
>
> **Section 2.** The adjusted dividend rates provided for under Section 1 are only applicable on 1996 et earnings of the concerned government-owned and/or controlled corporations.
>
> **Section 3.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.
>
> (Sgd.) **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **RONALDO B. ZAMORA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
