# Executive Order No. 239

**MODIFYING THE RATES OF DUTY ON CERTAIN IMPORTED ARTICLES AS PROVIDED UNDER THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978, AS AMENDED, IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THE PREFERENTIAL TARIFF RATES ON CERTAIN PRODUCTS UNDER THE ASEAN INDUSTRIAL COOPERATION (AICO) SCHEME**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 239
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2000/eo_239_2000.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 239     May 4, 2000**
>
> MODIFYING THE RATES OF DUTY ON CERTAIN IMPORTED ARTICLES AS PROVIDED UNDER THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978, AS AMENDED, IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THE PREFERENTIAL TARIFF RATES ON CERTAIN PRODUCTS UNDER THE ASEAN INDUSTRIAL COOPERATION (AICO) SCHEME
>
> WHEREAS, the Philippines is a Contracting Party to the Basic Agreement on the ASEAN Industrial Cooperation (AICO) Scheme signed in Singapore on27 April 1996;
>
> WHEREAS, the Philippines is a participating country in the approved AICO Arrangement of Ford Motor Company Philippines, Inc. and Laguna Autoparts Mfg., Corp. (LAMCOR), both along with Thailand;
>
> WHEREAS, under the FORD AICO Arrangement, the Philippines (Ford Motor Co. Phils. Inc.) will import from Thailand certain original equipment manufacturer (OEM) automotive parts/components for FORD Laser LYNX passenger cars (HS 8703.90 10) and Ford Ranger Pick-ups (HS 8704.90 10). In exchange, Thailand will import from the Philippines complementary component parts for the OEM of FORD Laser LYNX passenger cars;
>
> WHEREAS, under the LAMCOR AICO Arrangement, the Philippines (Laguna Autoparts Mfg. Corp.) will import from Thailand certain intermediate products for the assembly of OEM alternators and starters. In exchange, Thailand will import from the Philippines complementary component parts for alternators and starters;
>
> WHEREAS, AICO Certificate of Eligibility Nos. Ford/2000/1 and MEL/2000/3 were both issued on 03 January 2000 in favor of the participating companies in the FORD and LAMCOR AICO Arrangements;
>
> WHEREAS, in consonance with Articles 5 and 7 of the Basic Agreement of the AICO Scheme, participating companies in the approved FORD and LAMCOR AICO Arrangements shall qualify for 0-5% preferential tariff rates to be extended by Thailand and the Philippines as participating countries, effective within 45 days from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Eligibility by the ASEAN Secretariat.
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me under Section 402 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, do hereby order:
>
> Section 1. The articles specifically listed in **Annex "A"**, hereof, as classified under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, shall be accorded the AICO rate of 5% on corpponent parts of Laser LYNX passenger cars (HS 8703.90 10) and the AICO rate of 3% on component parts of Ranger Pick-ups (HS 8704.90 10) as specified in Column 6 thereof.
>
> Section 2. The AICO rate provided in **Annex "A"**, shall be accorded to the AICO entity in Thailand (Auto Alliance (Thailand) Company Limited) effective from 03 January 2000.
>
> Section 3. The articles specifically listed in **Annex "B"** hereof, as classified under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, shall be accorded the AICO rate of 3% on vacuum pump assemblies (HS 8414.10 00), yoke assemblies, rotor assemblies (HS 8511.90 00), and rear and front brackets (HS 8511.90 00) as specified in Column 5 thereof.
>
> Section 4. The AICO rate provided in **Annex "B"** shall be accorded to the AICO entity in Thailand (Mitsubishi Electric Thai Auto Parts Co. Ltd.) effective 03 January 2000.
>
> Section 5. In the event that any subsequent changes are made in the basic (MFN) Philippine rate of duty on any of the articles listed in *Annexes "A and "B"* to a rate lower than the AICO rate prescribed in Column 6 of Annex "A" and Column 5 of Annex "B"', such article shall automatically be accorded the corresponding reduced rate of duty. Effective 01 January 2003, the final CEPT rate on the subject articles shall apply. lawphi1.net
>
> Section 6. Upon the effectivity of this Executive Order, the articles specifically listed in the aforesaid *Annexes "A" and "B"* which are entered or withdrawn from warehouses in the Philippines for consumption shall pay the applicable AICO preferential tariff rates specified under Sections 1 and 3, hereof, subject to qualification under the Rules of Origin for the CEPT, as evidenced by the Certificate of Origin - Form "D".
>
> Section 7. Any revision/s to the part numbers appearing in the aforesaid Annexes shall be communicated immediately to the Bureau of Customs by the Board of Investments within five (5) days after receipt of the official copy of the revised part numbers from the ASEAN Secretariat.
>
> Section 8. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of May in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand.
>
>
>
> By the President:
>
> (Signed)
>
>
> **RONALDO ZAMORA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
> **ANNEX A
> ARTICLES GRANTED PREFERENTIAL TARIFF UNDER THE APPROVED
> FORD AICO SCHEME**
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | **HS CODE** | **MODEL / TYPE** | **PRODUCT  DESCRIPTION** | **PART NO.** | **SOURCE COUNTRY  (AICO COMPANY)** | **APPLICABLE AICO PREFERENTIAL  TARIFF** |
> | (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) | (6) |
> | 8703.90 10 | Laser Lynx  Passenger Car | Various Component  Parts: |  | Thailand  (Auto Alliance(Thailand)  Co. Ltd.) | 5 |
> |  |  | Radiator | ZLO1 15 200 A |  |  |
> |  |  | Radiator | ZLO2 15 200 A |  |  |
> |  |  | Cooling Unit | BK2K 61520 |  |  |
> |  |  | Condenser Assy | B25F 61 480 |  |  |
> |  |  | Tank Assy Receiver | BJ3D 61 500A |  |  |
> |  |  | Hose Flexible, H | B25F 61 461 |  |  |
> |  |  | Hose Flexible, L | B25F 61 462D |  |  |
> |  |  | Pipe-Cooler#4 | BJ3D 61 467B |  |  |
> |  |  | Pipe-Cooler#3 | BJ3D 61 466B |  |  |
> |  |  | Pipe-Cooler#2 | BJ3D 61 465D |  |  |
> |  |  | Pipe-Cooler#1 | B25F 61 464 |  |  |
> |  |  | Blower Unit | BJOE 61 140C |  |  |
> |  |  | Stiffener | ZLO1 10 430 |  |  |
> |  |  | Hose Assy Air-Int | ZMO1 1322X |  |  |
> |  |  | Hose Assy Air-Int | B33G 1322X |  |  |
> |  |  | Rubber E/MTG#2 | B25D 39050 |  |  |
> |  |  | Cable Rear RH | B25D 44 410 |  |  |
> |  |  | Cable Rear RH | B25D 44 420 |  |  |
> |  |  | Window Assy Back | B25N 63 930 |  |  |
> |  |  | Tank Assy Washer | B25D 67 480 |  |  |
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | 8704.90 10 | Ranger Utility (Pick-ups) Motor Vehicles | Various Component Parts: |  | Thailand  (Auto Alliance  (Thailand)  Co. Ltd.) | 3 |
> |  |  | Engine Complete | WLTE 02000 |  |  |
> |  |  | Trans-Complete | M51V03000 |  |  |
> |  |  | Frame Assy | UH83 3801X |  |  |
> |  |  | Axle-R | UTOJ 0580X |  |  |
> |  |  | Shaft Assy-Prop | SAO2 25100 |  |  |
> |  |  | Gear + Pitman | UJO6 32920 |  |  |
> |  |  | Link Assy | UJO8 32260 |  |  |
> |  |  | Wheel Disc (5) | 99655 35040 |  |  |
> |  |  | Meter Set | UJ34 55430 |  |  |
> |  |  | Tank Comp-Fuel | UH71 42100 |  |  |
> |  |  | Booster Assy Brake | UJ08 43950 |  |  |
> |  |  | Sill-Side, In, R,Rh | UH83 5395Z |  |  |
> |  |  | Sill-Side, In, Rh | UH83 53950 |  |  |
> |  |  | Sill-Side, In, R,Lh | UH83 5495Z |  |  |
> |  |  | Sill-Side, In, Lh | UH83 54950 |  |  |
> |  |  | Sill-Side, In, R,Rh | UH83 53952 |  |  |
> |  |  | Sill-Side, In, R,Lh | UH83 54952 |  |  |
> |  |  | Panel Assy-Shroud | UH71 53100 |  |  |
> |  |  | Reinf-Apron, R, Rh | UH71 53227 |  |  |
> |  |  | Reinf-Apron, R, Lh | UH71 54227 |  |  |
> |  |  | Panel Assy-Dash, Lwt | UJ06 54400 |  |  |
> |  |  | Bolt | 9079 50816 |  |  |
> |  |  | Stay-Carrier, Bat,A | UH71 532DX |  |  |
> |  |  | Stay-Carrier, Bat,B | UH71 532DY |  |  |
> |  |  | Carrier-Battery | UH71 532D3 |  |  |
> |  |  | Bolt | 90796 0612 |  |  |
> |  |  | Floor Assy-F | UJ12 53600 |  |  |
> |  |  | Disc Assy Clutch | WLA1 16460 |  |  |
> |  |  | Blower Unit | UJ06 61140 |  |  |
> |  |  | Axle-F; Rh | UTOC 04800 |  |  |
> |  |  | Glass Wind Shield | UH71 63901 |  |  |
> |  |  | Shaft Energy Absord | UH71 32100 |  |  |
> |  |  | Apron Assy Whl Rh | UH71 5321Y |  |  |
> |  |  | Panel Floor | UH83 65101 |  |  |
> |  |  | Mat Assy-Floor | UJ12 6867X |  |  |
> |  |  | Cover Assy-Clutch | WLA1 16410 |  |  |
> |  |  | Floor Assy-R | UH83 53700 |  |  |
> |  |  | Rest Assy-Load | UH83 65800 |  |  |
> |  |  | Apron Assy-Whl LH | UH71 54210 |  |  |
> |  |  | Control Assy-Htr | UJ06 61190 |  |  |
> |  |  | Belt-B | UJ12 57630 |  |  |
> |  |  | Belt-A-LH | UH83 57780 |  |  |
> |  |  | Belt-A-RH | UH83 57720 |  |  |
>
>
> **ANNEX B
> ARTICLES GRANTED PREFERENTIAL TARIFF UNDER THE APPROVED
> LAMCOR AICO SCHEME**
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | **HS CODE** | **PRODUCT DESCRIPTION** | **PART NO.** | **SOURCE COUNTRY (AICO COMPANY)** | **APPLICABLE AICO PREFERENTIAL TARIFF** |
> | (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | (5) |
> | 8414.10 00 | Various Component  Parts of Vacuum Pump: |  | Thailand  (Mitsubishi Electric Thai Auto Parts Co. Ltd.) | 3 |
> |  | Vacuum Pump.  Assy (60 cc) | A595C31471 |  |  |
> |  | Vacuum Pump  Assy (30 cc) | A595C21171 |  |  |
> | 8511.90 00 | Various Component  Parts of Alternator: |  | Thailand  (Mitsubishi Electric Thai Auto Parts Co. Ltd.) | 3 |
> |  | Rotor Assy (R4.28 Ohm)  Rotor Assy (R2,73 Ohm) | A882B58474  A882B59974 |  |  |
> | 8511.90 00 | Various Component  Parts of Starter: |  | Thailand  (Mitsubishi Electric Thai Auto Parts Co. Ltd.) | 3 |
> |  | Yoke Assy  Bracket Front  Bracket Rear | M800C49771  M641AA0871  M642B28771 |  |  |
>
>
>
>
