
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

*First Regular Session*

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 03**

**Introduced by**
**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA**

**Co-authored by:**
**MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, RN, CESE, MNSA; MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil; MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, CESE; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, CSEE, MNSA; and MP Rasul Enderez Ismael**

**A RESOLUTION**
**COMMENDING AND EXTENDING PROFOUND GRATITUDE TO HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT FERDINAND “BONGBONG” ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR. FOR HONORING AND SUSTAINING THE GAINS OF PEACE AGREEMENTS WHICH LED TO THE UNPRECEDENTED UNIFICATION OF THE MORO FRONTS IN THE COUNTRY**

**WHEREAS,** Section 2, Article XVI of R.A. No. 11054 or the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL) states that the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) shall be the interim government in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region during the transition period. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front shall lead the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, without prejudice to the participation of the Moro National Liberation Front in its membership;

**WHEREAS,** last October of 2021, R.A. No. 11593, otherwise known as “An Act Resetting the First Regular Elections in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM)” was signed into law by then President Duterte. Section 1 of the said law amended Section 13, Article XVI of the BOL, thereby postponing the first regular elections in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) and synchronizing it with the 2025 national elections.

**WHEREAS,** under Section 2 of R.A. No. 11593, it is stated that during the extension of the transition period, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) shall continue as the interim government of the BARMM; provided, however, that the President may appoint the eighty (80) new interim members of the BTA who shall serve up to June 30, 2025 or until their successors shall have been elected and qualified;

**WHEREAS,** on June 30, 2022, President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. (President Marcos Jr.) took his oath as the 17th President of the Republic of the Philippines;

**WHEREAS,** on August 12, 2022, President Marcos Jr. administered the oath to the eighty (80) newly and re-appointed members of the BTA representing the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), and various sectors from the Government of the Philippines (GPH), .

**WHEREAS,** President Marcos Jr. appointed the 80 BTA members only more than a month after his inauguration, a sign of his commitment and prioritization of the BARMM and the welfare of the Bangsamoro. In fact, the United Nations (UN) lauded President Marcos for his prompt appointment of the BTA Members. UN Resident Coordinator of the United Nations and Humanitarian Coordinator in the Philippines Gustavo Gonzalez said in a statement that “[t]he United Nations welcomes the President's prompt appointment of the BTA members, which indicates his prioritization of the peace process and its successful implementation”;¹

**WHEREAS,** all of this is in accordance with the implementation of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro (CAB), signed in 2014, the culmination of 17 years’ worth of peace negotiations between the MILF and GPH, through R.A. No. 11054 or the BOL;

**WHEREAS,** the BTA’s 41 members were nominated by the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, while the remaining 39 members were endorsed by the Philippine Government, some of whom are aligned with MNLF founding chairman Nur Misuari;

**WHEREAS,** with the new BTA, the former warring members of MNLF and MILF have been finally united under one Bangsamoro Autonomous Government;

**WHEREAS,** the MNLF’s participation, particularly under the leadership of Misuari, is a product of the “convergence effort” of the Office of the Presidential Adviser on Peace, Reconciliation and Unity (OPAPRU) to harmonize the Bangsamoro peace agreements, including the 1976 Tripoli deal, the 1996 final peace agreements and the 2014 Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro². This is the first time that the MILF and the MNLF will be working together.³ President Marcos expressed confidence that with the unification of the MILF and MNLF, forging a “good” pact would help BARMM attain the goal of bringing “progress for our people”;⁴

**WHEREAS,** President Marcos Jr. emphasized the need to provide a voice to all of the stakeholders and the parties involved. The president said that they did their absolute best in making sure that the representation that was filed in the Transition Authority would be “as fair as it has to be”. He foresees that the contributions and peace that will emanate from BARMM will “finally fulfill the promise of the promised land that we have been hoping for so very, very long”;⁵

**WHEREAS,** the UN, through its Humanitarian Coordinator Gonzalez, notes that the new composition of the BTA “is expected to allow for a smooth transition process and continuity of BTA programs, projects, and legislative measures on the one hand.” The UN sees that there is a “greater inclusivity” in the composition, as all of the MILF and MNLF factions and the diverse communities of the BARMM are all represented for the first time. Moreover, the new composition also allowed for more qualified women to be in the BTA. Thus, the President’s call for unity is all the more reinforced;⁶

**WHEREAS,** Secretary Carlito Galvez Jr., the Presidential Adviser on Peace, Reconciliation, and Unity, said during the oath-taking of the 80 BTA members that “[w]ith the joining of the MNLF and the MILF, and with the ‘balanced’ and fair or equitable composition of the 39 GPH nominees, this is now no longer just the BTA of the old BARMM but the BTA of a ‘United BARMM’”;⁷

**WHEREAS,** the BTA is extending its profound gratitude to President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. for making the Bangsamoro peace process a priority and for pursuing peace-building initiatives in the country;

**WHEREAS,** the BTA likewise extends its gratitude and appreciation to Secretary Carlito Galvez Jr. for his unwavering commitment, dedication, and hard work in the peace process;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED,** by the BTA Parliament, to pass and approve this Resolution Commending and Extending Profound Gratitude to His Excellency President Ferdinand “Bongbong” Romualdez Marcos Jr. for Honoring and Sustaining the Gains of Peace Agreements Which led to the Unprecedented Unification of the Moro Fronts in the Country.

Adopted,

(Signed)
**ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**

***

