
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 18**

**Introduced by:**
**MP Engr. Baintan-Adil Ampatuan, MNSA**

**Co-Authored by:**
**MP Amir Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Laisa Masuhud- Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr.; MP Engr. Don Arbison A. Loong, MPSA; MP Rasul Enderez Ismael**

**A RESOLUTION**
**IN AID OF LEGISLATION, DIRECTING THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH (MOH) TO APPRISE THE BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY (BTA) PARLIAMENT ON THE STATUS OF VACCINATION IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM)**

**WHEREAS,** vaccination will strengthen the wall of immunity of the population to prevent severe and critical COVID-19 cases;

**WHEREAS,** the Department of Health (DOH) launched a COVID-19 vaccination campaign last July 26, dubbed as "*PinasLakas!*," which aims to provide booster shots to eligible Filipinos and increase the vaccination rate among senior citizens;

**WHEREAS,** according to DOH Officer in Charge Undersecretary Maria Rosario Vergeire, the DOH will make vaccines more accessible and available in markets, places of worship, malls, transport terminals, offices, factories, plazas, or schools;

**WHEREAS,** there are already 71.4 million Filipinos reported to have been fully-vaccinated against COVID-19 and the government needs to vaccinate more than 23 million people to achieve 50 percent booster coverage as part of the “first 100 days” of the Marcos administration;

**WHEREAS,** the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region was reported to have the lowest vaccination rate in the country;

**WHEREAS,** the Department of Education ordered the full face-to-face classes on November of 2022, which will expose the students and pupils to the public, and as a result, to COVID-19 virus;

**WHEREAS,** the Ministry of Health- BARMM must ramp up its vaccination program in order to be at par with other neighboring regions;

**WHEREAS,** there is a need to apprise the BTA Parliament of the status of the vaccination program in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in order to direct and/or redirect its policies for the success of vaccination program in the region.

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED,** by the BTA Parliament, to pass and approve this resolution in aid of legislation, directing the Ministry of Health to apprise the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament on the status of vaccination in the BARMM.

**BE IT RESOLVED FURTHER,** that a copy of this resolution be furnished to the Ministry of Health.

Resolution passed this \_\_\_\_\_\_ day of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2022, Cotabato City Philippines.

Adopted,

(Signed)
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**