
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

*First Regular Session*

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 43**

**Introduced by:**
**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, CSEE, MNSA**

**Co-Authored by:**
**MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil; MPSA MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, RN, CESE, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, CSEE, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, CESE, MPSA; MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Rasul E. Ismael**

***

**A RESOLUTION REQUIRING THE OFFICE OF THE CHIEF MINISTER (OCM), THROUGH THE BANGSAMORO PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (BPDA), TO UPDATE THE BANGSAMORO TRANSITION PLAN 2019-2022, FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY (BTA) PARLIAMENT**

**WHEREAS,** Section 2, Article XVI of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11054 or the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL) states that [t]here is hereby created a **Bangsamoro Transition Authority which shall be the interim government** in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region during the transition period;

**WHEREAS,** Section 3, Article XVI of the same law provides that "[t]he legislative and executive powers in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region during the transition **shall be vested in the Bangsamoro Transition Authority**";

**WHEREAS,** Article XVI of the same law, provides for the following provisions:

**Section 4. *Functions and Priorities.*** - The Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall ensure the accomplishment of the following priorities during the transition period:

(c) Organization of the bureaucracy of the Bangsamoro Government during transition, **including the approval and implementation of a transition plan...**

**Section 6. *Transition Plan.*** - Within the first sixty (60) days of the transition period, **the interim Chief Minister shall submit to the Bangsamoro Transition Authority a transitory plan that shall contain the proposed organizational plan**, as well as, the schedule for implementation therefor. The Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall, by a majority vote of all its members, approve or otherwise act on the proposed transition plan within ten (10) days upon submission by the interim Chief Minister. If the transition plan is not is not acted upon within sixty (60) days, it shall be deemed approved. The transition plan shall be implemented within fifteen (15) days from its approval.

**WHEREAS,** on June 17, 2019, in a special session called for the purpose, the BTA Parliament approved and adopted Resolution No. 12, titled *"Resolution Approving the Transition Plan of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM)"*;

**WHEREAS,** according to the Chief Minister Ahod Ebrahim, the transition plan *"aims to identify the new structural framework of the BARMM, based on the provisions of Republic Act No. 11054, also known as the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL), taking into consideration the existing structure, budget, and other relevant features of the ARMM"<sup>1</sup>*;

**WHEREAS** the transition period was extended until June 30, 2025 by virtue of R.A. No. 11593, otherwise known as "An Act Resetting the First Regular Elections in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM)";

**WHEREAS,** His Excellency President Ferdinand "Bongbong" Romualdez Marcos Jr., appointed the 80 Members of Parliament of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) last August 12, 2022 and the BTA held its inaugural session on September 15, 2022;

**WHEREAS,** given the extension of the transition period and with the new composition of the BTA Parliament, there is a need to revisit and update the Bangsamoro Transition Plan, 2019-2022 and define the road map and deliverables of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, as an interim government, during the extended period until June 30, 2025;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED** by the BTA Parliament, to pass and approve this Resolution requiring the Office of the Chief Minister, through the Bangsamoro Planning and Development Authority, to update the Bangsamoro Transition Plan 2019-2022, for consideration and approval of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament.

Adopted,

**ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
