
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Bangsamoro Government Center
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

Proposed Resolution No. 42

Introduced by:

Atty. John Anthony “Jet” L. Lim, Al-haj
Atty. Jose I. Lorena
Atty. Nabil A. Tan
Atty. Paisalin P. Tago

**A RESOLUTION URGING NATIONAL MAPPING AND RESOURCE INFORMATION AUTHORITY (NAMRIA) TO FINALIZE THE DELINEATION AND DEMARCATION OF BANGSAMORO MUNICIPAL AND REGIONAL WATERS AND ZONES OF JOINT COOPERATION IN THE SULU SEA AND MORO GULF**

**WHEREAS,** Section 4, Article III (Territorial Jurisdiction) of Republic Act No. 11054 otherwise known as the Organic Act for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao provides that:

“Bangsamoro Municipal and Regional Waters. - The municipal and regional waters of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall extend up to fifteen (15) kilometers and nineteen (19) kilometers, respectively, from the low-water mark of the coasts that are part of the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction...”

**WHEREAS,** Section 18, Article XIII (Regional Economy and Patrimony) of the Organic Act provides that:

“Zones of Jointly Cooperation. - Zones of Joint Cooperation in the Sulu Sea and the Moro Gulf are hereby created, the coordinates of which shall be defined by an ad hoc Joint Body composed of representatives from the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the National Mapping and Resource Information Authority, and corresponding number of representatives from appropriate agencies of the Bangsamoro Government.

**WHEREAS,** Section 6, Article XII (Fiscal Autonomy) of the same Republic Act No. 11054, provides:

Sources of Revenues. - The Bangsamoro Government shall have the power to create its own sources of revenues and to levy taxes, fees, and charges, subject to the provisions of this Organic Law and consistent with the principles of equalization, equity, accountability, administrative simplicity harmonization and economic efficiency, and fiscal autonomy. Such taxes, fees, and charges shall accrue exclusively to the Bangsamoro Government.

The sources of revenues of the Bangsamoro Government include, among others, the following:

...

(d) Revenues or shares in revenues from the exploration, development, and utilization of natural resources derived from land or water areas or territories within the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction;...”

**WHEREAS,** based on recent Philippine Statistics Authority’s (PSA) Fisheries Situation Report from April to June 2022, the total volume of fisheries production in the country reached 1,213.31 metric tons (MT), Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) ranked first among the country’s top five (5) fish-producing regions during the second quarter of 2022, with total fisheries production of 346.42 MT or 28.6%, making it the biggest contributor for fisheries production in the Philippines.

**WHEREAS,** most of the fisheries productions in BARMM, which are mainly aquaculture, were produced in the island provinces of Tawi-Tawi, Sulu, and Basilan situated in the Sulu Sea, within the territorial jurisdiction of the Regional Government;

**WHEREAS,** based on the same Fisheries Situation Report, Zamboanga Peninsula (Region IX) ranked second with 153.38 MT (12.6%) and SOCCSKSARGEN (Region XII) ranked fifth with 89.41 MT (7.4%), these regions are contiguous to the Regional Government and therefore their production may have come from the Sulu Sea;

**WHEREAS,** pursuant to the legislative mandate under aforesaid Sec. 18, Article 13 of the Organic Act, NAMRIA, which is the government agency responsible for providing public with mapmaking services and acting as its central mapping agency, has made the preliminary delineation of the municipal and regional waters and the Zones of Joint Cooperation but the same has not been finalized owing to some issues and concerns such as boundary disputes between the BARMM and non-BARMM local government units, among others;

**WHEREAS,** there is a necessity to finalize the coordinates and therefore delineate and demarcate the municipal and regional waters and Zones of Joint Cooperation in the Sulu Sea and Moro Gulf, if only to provide legal bases for the Regional Government and/or its local government units within these bodies of water to exercise their revenue making powers, among others;

**WHEREAS,** there is no legal prohibition on NAMRIA to finalize the demarcation of the municipal and regional waters and zones of cooperation without prejudice to the outcome or resolution for areas with boundary disputes;

**NOW THEREFORE,** be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority to urge NAMRIA to finalize the delineation and demarcation of coordinates of the **MUNICIPAL AND REGIONAL WATERS and the ZONES OF JOINT COOPERATION IN THE SULU SEA and MORO GULF** in accordance with Section 4, Article III and Section 18, Article XIII of Republic Act no. 11054 otherwise known as the Organic Act of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

Adopted,__________________________.

**AUTHORS:**

**Atty. John Anthony “Jet” L. Lim, Al-haj**

**Atty. Jose I. Lorena**

**Atty. Nabil A. Tan**

**Atty. Paisalin P. Tago**

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested:

**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker