
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

Proposed Resolution No. 50

Introduced by:
MP MOHAGHER M. IQBAL

Co-Authors:
MP. AKMAD I. ABAS, MP HARON M. ABAS, MP BASIT M. ABBAS, MP MUDJIB C. ABU, MP MOSBER E. ALUDDIN, MP IBRAHIM D. ALI, MP. DAN ASNAWIE, MP. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG, MP. BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO, MP. ABULLAH E. GAYAK, MP ABDULLAH B. HASHIM, MP. ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, MP SAID Z. SALENDAB, MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG, MP SALI O. SALIK, MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL, MP MARY ANN M. ARNADO, MP RAISSA H. JAJURIE, MP AIDA M. SILONGAN, MP ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN, MP SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA, MP RAMON A. PIANG, SR. MP EDDIE M. ALIH, MP KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., MP. TAWAKAL MIDTIMBANG, MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP EDUARD U. GUERRA, MP. UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP HUSSEIN P. MUÑOZ, MP SAID SHIEK, MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MP MATARUL M. ESTINO, MP MOHAMMAD S. YACOB, MP LANANG ALI, JR., MP ABDULRAOF A. MACACUA, MP SUWAIB L. ORANON, MP ALI B. SOLAIMAN, MP OMAR YASSER C. SEMA, MP SUSANA S. ANAYATIN

**A RESOLUTION EXTENDING DEEPEST CONDOLENCES AND SYMPATHY TO THE BEREAVED FAMILY OF FORMER BARANGAY CHAIRMAN OF DALICAN, DATU ODIN SINSUAT, DATU JAMAEL Q. SINSUAT, SR. IN THE IRREPARABLE LOSS AND THE GREAT PAIN THEY ARE EXPERIENCING FROM HIS BRUTAL DEMISE**

**WHEREAS,** 55-year old former Barangay Chairman Datu Jamael Quesada Sinsuat Jr. of Barangay Dalican, Datu Odin Sinsuat, Maguindanao was treacherously shot to death by an unidentified gunman on September 30, 2022, just after the Friday Jumu'ah Prayer, within the vicinity of a Mosque located in said barangay;

**WHEREAS,** as a public servant, Datu Jamael Q. Sinsuat Jr, had served the Municipality of Datu Odin Sinsuat, Maguindanao for 18 years very diligently with pride, honor and dignity;

**WHEREAS,** the late Datu Jamael Q. Sinsuat Sr. leaves behind his wife, Bai Monessa Usman-Sinsuat, and six (6) successful children, who we join in praying that His Creator grants the departed the highest place in Jannah;

**WHEREAS,** the Honorable Chief Minister Ahod B. Ebrahim, the Members of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, the officials and employees of the Bangsamoro Government wish his family comfort in the midst of pain, consolation in the midst of sorrow, and may their strength prevail to help them through this difficult time.

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED,** as it is hereby RESOLVED by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, to extend deepest condolences and sympathy to the bereaved family of the Honorable Datu Jamael Q. Sinsuat Sr. in the irreparable loss and the great pain they are experiencing from his brutal demise.

Let a copy of this Resolution be furnished to the bereaved family of the late former Barangay Chairman Datu Jamael Quesada Sinsuat Jr. of Barangay Dalican, Datu Odin Sinsuat, Maguindanao.

This Resolution shall take effect immediately upon its approval.

**Adopted, \_\_\_\_\_\_ October 2022.**

(Signature)
**MOHAGHER M. IQBAL**
Member of Parliament

**Certified correct:**
PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL
Secretary General

**Attested:**
HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG
Speaker