
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Cotabato City

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

Proposed Resolution No. 64

Introduced by:
MP HUSSEIN P. MUÑOZ

Co-Authors:
MP AHOD B. EBRAHIM, MP. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG, MP ABDULRAOF A. MACACUA, MP MOHAGHER M. IQBAL, MP AKMAD I. ABAS, MP HARON M. ABAS, MP BASIT M. ABBAS, MP MUDJIB C. ABU, MP MOSBER E. ALUDDIN, MP IBRAHIM D. ALI, MP. DAN ASNAWIE, MP. BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO, MP. ABULLAH E. GAYAK, MP ABDULLAH B. HASHIM, MP. ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, MP SAID Z. SALENDAB, MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG, MP ALI O. SALIK, MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL, MP MARY ANN M. ARNADO, MP RAISSA H. JAJURIE, MP AIDA M. SILONGAN, MP ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN, MP SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA, MP RAMON A. PIANG, SR. MP EDDIE M. ALIH, MP KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., MP. TAWAKAL MIDTIMBANG, MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP EDUARD U. GUERRA, MP. UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP SAID SHIEK, MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MP MATARUL M. ESTINO, MP MOHAMMAD S. YACOB, MP LANANG ALI, JR., MP SUWAIB L. ORANON, MP ALI B. SOLAIMAN

A RESOLUTION
DIRECTING THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY (CPOS) TO CONDUCT A PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY IN AID OF LEGISLATION INTO THE SERIES OF KILLINGS AND ALARMING STATE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY PARTICULARLY IN THE PROVINCE OF MAGUINDANAO, THE MUNICIPALITY OF PIKIT AND THE SPECIAL GEOGRAPHIC AREA

WHEREAS, the cases of killings and other forms of violence in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, most recently in the Province of Maguindanao and the Special Geographic Area, are rising at an alarming rate;

WHEREAS, the spate of violence has already left more than 30 people dead;

WHEREAS, among the reported incidents of killings and violence in the aforementioned areas are the following:

1. On 19 July 2022, 58-year old Alex Salcedo was shot dead in Barangay Batulawan, Pikit, SGA;
2. On 20 July 2022, 58-year old Datu Jalandoni Matalam Akas, chairperson of Barangay Macabual, Pikit, was killed in an ambush in Barangay Nalapaan, Pikit, SGA;
3. On 29 July 2022, Burhan Pagayao Palwa, 22, was shot and killed in Barangay Dungguan, Aleosan, SGA;
4. On 26 August 2022, four men were killed in an ambush in Barangay Manaulanan, Pikit, SGA. The victims were identified as Kalid Selongan, 28; Ray Benias, 47; William Cantonis, 41; and Darwin Cantonis, 28;
5. On 26 August 2022, Mujahid Guiabal, 24, and Anuadod Usman, 26, were attacked by gunmen in Barangay Gli-Gli, Pikit, SGA. The two were injured in the attack;
6. On 15 September 2022, Patrolman Brian Singco was shot and injured in an attack by two unidentified assailants in Barangay Poblacion, Pikit, North Cotabato;
7. On 17 September 2022, John Rey Malunes and his brother Romeo Malunes were shot and injured by unknown assailants in Barangay Batulawan, Pikit, SGA;
8. On 19 September 2022, Corporal Al Muiz Dima, was shot and killed in Barangay Magsaysay, Parang, Maguindanao;
9. On 29 September 2022, Eliseo Pangako, was shot dead in Barangay Balatican, Pikit;
10. On 30 September 2022, former Datu Odin Sinsuat mayoralty candidate, Datu Jamael Sinsuat was shot and killed in broad daylight.

WHEREAS, the spate of killings and other forms of violence engender lawlessness and endanger the life, security and property of residents in the area;

WHEREAS, North Cotabato Governor Emmylou “Lala” Taliño-Mendoza has issued a statement concerning the escalating violence in the area and underscored that “[p]eace and security is a collective effort by law enforcement agencies, local peace keeping forces and the community in general;”

WHEREAS, Article V, Section 3 of Republic Act 11054 or the Organic Law for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao provides, in part, that “[w]ithin its territorial jurisdiction, the Bangsamoro Government shall...promote health and safety, ...maintain peace and order, and preserve the comfort and convenience of its inhabitants;”

WHEREAS, Article VII, Section 5 (a) of the same organic law provides that the Parliament shall have the power to “[e]nact laws to promote, protect, and ensure the general welfare of the Bangsamoro people and other inhabitants in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;”

WHEREAS, Article VII, Section 5 (d) of the same law states that the Parliament shall have the power to “[c]onduct inquiries in aid of legislation in accordance with its rules;”

NOW, THEREFORE, be it

RESOLVED, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, to direct the Committee on Public Order and Safety (CPOS) to conduct a parliamentary inquiry in aid of legislation, submit a report and recommend specific actions to help normalize the situation.

Adopted, ______________________.

MP HUSSEIN P. MUÑOZ MP AHOD B. EBRAHIM

MP. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG MP ABDULRAOF A. MACACUA

MP MOHAGHER M. IQBAL MP AKMAD I. ABAS

MP HARON M. ABAS MP MARY ANN M. ARNADO

MP SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA MP ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN