
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

Fifth Regular Session

Proposed Resolution No. 70

Introduced by:
MP MARY ANN M. ARNADO
MP OMAR YASSER CRISOSTOMO SEMA
MP MOHAGHER M. IQBAL
MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL

Co-Authors:
MP. AKMAD I. ABAS, MP HARON M. ABAS, MP BASIT M. ABBAS, MP MUDJIB C. ABU, MP MOSBER E. ALUDDIN, MP IBRAHIM D. ALI, MP.DAN ASNAWIE, MP. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG, MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO, MP. ABULLAH E. GAYAK, MP ABDULLAH B. HASHIM, MP. ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, MP SAID Z. SALENDAB, MP. BENJAMIN T. LOONG, MP. SALI O. SALIK, MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL, MP RAISSA H. JAJURIE, MP AIDA M. SILONGAN, MP ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN, MP SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA ALBA, MP RAMON A. PIANG, SR. MP EDDIE M. ALIH, MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP EDUARD U. GUERRA, MP UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP HUSSEIN P. MUNOZ, MP SAID SHIEK, MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MP MATARUL M. ESTINO, MP MOHAMMAD S. YACOB, MP LANANG ALI, JR., MP ABDUL RAOF A. MACACUA, MP SUWAIB L. ORANON, MP ALI B. SOLAIMAN, MP ABDULWAHAB M. PAK

**RESOLUTION APPEALING TO HIS EXCELLENCY, FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS, JR. TO FORMALLY CONSTITUTE AND APPOINT THE MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL AMNESTY COMMISSION, EXTEND THE EFFECTIVITY OF THE AMNESTY PROCLAMATION AND FASTRACK ITS IMPLEMENTATION**

**WHEREAS,** on February 5, 2021, Presidential Proclamation No. 1090 Series of 2021 was issued granting Amnesty to members of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) who have committed crimes punishable under the Revised Penal Code and special penal laws in furtherance of their political beliefs.

**WHEREAS,** on even date, Presidential Proclamation No. 1091 Series of 2021 was similarly issued granting amnesty to members of the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) who have committed crimes punishable under the Revised Penal Code and special penal laws in furtherance of their political beliefs.

**WHEREAS,** on May 20, 2021, the House of Representatives issued Concurrent Resolution No. 12 and 13 in support of the declaration of Amnesty as it shares the view that “the creation of the National Amnesty Commission and the grant of amnesty in favor of the members of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, will not only enable the delivery of an important commitment of the government under the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro, particularly the gradual normalization of the previously conflict-affected areas but will also provide a meaningful and complete transformation and assimilation of the MILF decommissioned combatants into peaceful and progressive lives towards national reconciliation and healing in the Bangsamoro.¹

**WHEREAS,** on January 24, 2022, Senator Panfilo M. Lacson signified his support to the Amnesty Grant in a Sponsorship Speech for Concurring Resolutions Nos. 12 and 13, he expressed that: “giving out a second chance to over 7,600 prospective applicants who are willing to have a new start in life in a secure place in society. Never in our history has our nation sought and demanded a time of healing with much fervor and tenacity than we do today – healing from the health crisis which scarred our people, healing from the economic, social and political distress that, by and large, spoiled our nation.”²

**WHEREAS,** the grant of amnesty is envisioned “to promote an atmosphere conducive to the attainment of a just, comprehensive, and enduring equanimity and is in line with the government’s call for peace, unity, and reconciliation to bring closure to past enmity, rancor, and bitterness that has stymied lasting amity among the Filipino people”.³

**WHEREAS,** by virtue of the above-stated Proclamations, a National Amnesty Commission is to be created to receive and process applications for amnesty and determine whether the applicants who shall apply are entitled to amnesty.

**WHEREAS,** as of today, the National Amnesty Commission is yet to be formally constituted beginning with the appointment of qualified Commissioners who will be tasked to issue the Implementing Rules and Regulations within 60 days from the effectivity of the Proclamation.

**WHEREAS,** Proclamation No. 1090 and 1091 provides that “Applications for the grant of amnesty shall be filed under oath with the Amnesty Commission within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Proclamation. It further provides that “This Proclamation shall take effect upon concurrence by a majority of all the members of the Congress”

**WHEREAS,** the requisite concurrence of Congress took effect on January 24, 2022 with the issuance of Senate Concurrent Resolutions 12 and 13. Given this timeline, there is barely three (3) months left to implement and process the amnesty applications of numerous qualified applicants. The critical step to operationalize the whole process will be the appointment of the members of the National Amnesty Commission.

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED,** as it is hereby RESOLVED by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao:

1. To appeal to His Excellency, President Ferdinand Romualdez Marcos, Jr. to formally constitute the National Amnesty Commission and duly appoint qualified and competent members.
2. Extend the effectivity the Proclamation 1091 and 1092 for one (1) year to be reckoned from the submission and approval of the Implementing Rules and Regulation by the National Amnesty Commission
3. Fasttrack the issuance of the Implementing Rules and Regulation and the processing and approval of the amnesty applications.

**Adopted, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ October 2022.**

Principal Authors:

(Signature)
**HON. MARY ANN M. ARNADO**
Member of Parliament

(Signature)
**HON. OMAR YASSER CRISOSTOMO SE**
Member of Parliament

(Signature)
**HON. MOHAGHER M. IQBAL**
Member of Parliament

(Signature)
**HON. BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**
Member of Parliament

¹ Sponsorship speech of House Speaker Lord Allan Velasco, 28 March 2021.
² Omnibus sponsorship speech of Senator Panfilo Lacson, January 24, 2022.
³ Proclamation No. 1090 Series of 2021, page 1.

**Certified correct:**
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

**Attested:**
**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker