# Republic Act No. 2206

**An Act Creating Barrios in the Province of Leyte**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 2206
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1959/ra_2206_1959.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 2206**
>
> **An Act Creating Barrios in the Province of Leyte**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The sitio of Lo-ok in the Municipality of Cabucgayan, Province of Leyte, is hereby converted into a barrio to be known as Barrio Lo-ok.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** The sitios in the Municipality of Calubian, Province of Leyte, are converted into barrios of the said municipality, as follows:
>
> Sitio Malobago to Barrio Malobago;
>
> Sitio Inalad to Barrio Inalad;
>
> Sitio Caruyocan to Barrio Caruyocan;
>
> Sitio Laray to Barrio Laray;
>
> Sitio Bunacan to Barrio Bunacan;
>
> Sitio Kawayanan to Barrio Kawayanan;
>
> Sitio Railes to Barrio Railes;
>
> Sitio Nepa to Barrio Nepa;
>
> Sitio Tagharigue to Barrio Tagharigue;
>
> Sitio Oson to Barrio Oson;
>
> Sitio Jubay to Barrio Jubay; and
>
> Sitio Gotusan to Barrio Gotusan.
>
> **Section 3.** The sitios in the Municipality of Almeria, Province of Leyte, are converted into barrios of the said municipality, as follows:
>
> Sitio Sampao to Barrio Sampao;
>
> Sitio Eyusan to Barrio Eyusan;
>
> Sitio Polang Bato to Barrio Polang Bato; and
>
> Sitio Matango to Barrio Matango.
>
> **Section 4.** The sitios in the Municipality of Culaba, Province of Leyte, are converted into barrios of the said municipality, as follows:
>
> Sitio Kalipayan to Barrio Kalipayan;
>
> Sitio Bacolod to Barrio Bacolod; and
>
> Sitio Guinadapunan to Barrio Guinadapunan.
>
> **Section 5.** The sitios in the Municipality of Biliran, Province of Leyte, are converted into barrios of the said municipality, as follows:
>
> Sitio Bato to Barrio Bato;
>
> Sitio Kanila to Barrio Kanila; and
>
> Sitio Nasonogan to Barrio Nasonogan.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: May 7, 1959.
>
>
>
