# Republic Act No. 2016

**AN ACT TO AMEND CERTAIN ITEMS IN REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED SIXTEEN HUNDRED THIRTEEN.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 2016
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1957/ra_2016_1957.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 2016, June 22, 1957 ]**
>
> **AN ACT TO AMEND CERTAIN ITEMS IN REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED SIXTEEN HUNDRED THIRTEEN.**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Item B-004.36, title B, appendix A of Republic Act Numbered Sixteen hundred thirteen, is amended to read as follows:
>
> > "B-004.36: Mindoro-Tomas Claudio and Echabelita Streets, Paco, Manila :GR : 15.00 : 3 : 15.00 : : : : : : 4 : : asphalt paving."
>
> **Section 2.** Item B-004.44, title B, appendix A of the same Act, is amended to read as follows:
>
> > "B-004.44: Construction of waiting shed in corner Herran and Calderon Streets :GR :10 :10 :10: :::::::: Improvement.
> >
> > "B-004.44-a: Asphalt paving of Liwayway Street, Sta. Ana :GR :8 :8 :8: ::::::::."
>
> **Section 3.** Item B-004.40, title B, appendix A of the same Act, is amended to read as follows:
>
> > "B-004.40: Asphalt paving of Kansas Street (from Vermont to San Andres :GR :12:12.00:12.00: : : : :8.00: : : : Improvement."
>
> **Section 4.** Item 21, subsection g, section two of the same Act, is amended by adding a new item thereof for the City of Manila:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | "21-a. Construction of Rizal's Monument at the corner of Penafrancia and Zamora Street | ₱10,000.00. |
> | "21-b. Improvement of Sases Puericulture Center | ₱11,000.00. |
> | "21-c. Construction of public plaza at Fabie Estate, Paco | ₱8,000.00." |
>
> **Section 5.** Item 25, subsection g, section two of the same Act for the City of Manila is amended to read as follows:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | "25. Asphalting and construction of curb and gutter  of Vermont Street, from Singalong Street to  San Marcelino Street, Malate | ₱5,000.00." |
>
> **Section 6.** Item 28, subsection g, section two of the same Act, is amended by adding a new item thereof for the City of Manila:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | "28. Asphalting and construction of curb and gutter of Taal Street, from San Andres Street, to Esguerra Street, Sta. Ana | ₱10,000.00." |
> | ;"28-a Asphalt paving for Cortada Street from San Luis to A. Flores, Ermita | ₱5,000.00." |
>
> **Section 7.** Item (f), for the City of Manila, group IV, subparagraph 28, subsection f, section two, and item 22, for the City of Manila, subsection g, section two of the same Act, are hereby repealed.
>
> **Section 8.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> Approved, June 22, 1957.
>
>
>
