# Republic Act No. 2325

**An Act to Amend Section Four of Republic Act Numbered Three Hundred and Nine by Providing that Horse Races May be Held All Day on Saturdays, Instead of on Saturday Afternoons Only as is Now Provided by Said Act**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 2325
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1959/ra_2325_1959.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 2325**
>
> **An Act to Amend Section Four of Republic Act Numbered Three Hundred and Nine by Providing that Horse Races May be Held All Day on Saturdays, Instead of on Saturday Afternoons Only as is Now Provided by Said Act**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section four of Republic Act Numbered Three hundred and nine is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > **Sec. 4**. *Racing days.* -Private individuals and entities duly licensed by the Games and Amusements Board may hold horse races on Sundays not reserved under this Act, on twenty-four Saturdays as may be determined by the said Board, and on legal holidays except Thursday and Friday of Holy Week, July fourth, commonly known as Independence Day, and December thirtieth, commonly known as Rizal Day. The second Sunday and the first Saturday of each month shall be reserved for races held by the Philippine Tuberculosis Society. The fourth Sunday of February, April, June, August, October and the third Sunday of December shall be reserved for races held by the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office. The fourth Sunday of January, May, July, and September and the second Saturday of January, April, July and October shall be reserved for races held by the White Cross, Inc. The fourth Sunday of March shall also be reserved for the national race, commonly known as the Grand Derby Race, held by the Philippine Tuberculosis Society. Other Saturdays shall be reserved for races authorized by the President of the Philippines for charitable, relief or civic purposes."
>
> **Section 2.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 19, 1959.
>
>
>
