# Republic Act No. 2342

**AN ACT TO FURTHER AMEND CERTAIN SECTIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED ELEVEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY-TWO, AS AMENDED,AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 2342
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1959/ra_2342_1959.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 2342**
>
> AN ACT TO FURTHER AMEND CERTAIN SECTIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED ELEVEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY-TWO, AS AMENDED,AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
>
> **Section 1.** Sections one and two of Republic Act Numbered Eleven hundred and sixty-two, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
>
> "Sec. 1. The expropriation of landed estates or haciendas, or lands which formerly formed part thereof, or any piece of land in the City of Manila, Quezon City and suburbs, which have been and are actually being leased to tenants for at least ten years, is hereby authorized: *Provided*, That such lands shall have at least fifty houses of tenants erected thereon.
>
> "Sec. 2. The Land Tenure Administration shall institute the necessary expropriation proceedings before the competent court."
>
> **Section 2.** The title of said Act, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
>
> "An Act providing for the expropriation of landed estates or haciendas or lands which formerly formed part thereof or any piece of land in the City of Manila, Quezon City and suburbs, their subdivision into small lots, and the sale of such lots at cost or their lease on reasonable terms, and for other purposes."
>
> **Section 3.** Ejectment proceedings against any tenant or occupant of lands authorized to be expropriated under Republic Act Numbered Eleven hundred and sixty-two, as amended, wherein no complaint for expropriation has yet been filed in the competent court, shall continue to be suspended until the thirtieth of June, nineteen hundred and sixty under the conditions set forth in section five of said Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 20, 1959
>
>
>
