# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 90

**FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 54 (S. 1999), AS AMENDED, BY TRANSFERRING THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF THE PASIG RIVER REHABILITATION COMMISSION TO THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 90
- **Date**: August 28, 2019
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2019/eo_90_2019.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 90, August 28, 2019 ]
>
> FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 54 (S. 1999), AS AMENDED, BY TRANSFERRING THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF THE PASIG RIVER REHABILITATION COMMISSION TO THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
>
> WHEREAS, Section 16, Article II of the Constitution enshrines the policy of the State to protect and advance the right of the people to a balanced and healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Executive Order No. 54 (s. 1999), as amended, created the Pasig River Rehabilitation Commission (PRRC) as an inter-agency body mandated to ensure that the Pasig River is rehabilitated to its historically pristine condition conducive to transport, recreation and tourism;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Republic Act (RA) No, 9275 or the "Philippine Clean Water Act of 2004," mandates the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) to exercise jurisdiction over all aspects of water pollution, and to take measures, using available methods and technologies, to prevent and abate such pollution;
>
> **WHEREAS,** pursuant to Administrative Order No. 16 (s. 2019), the DENR has been tasked to lead the Manila Bay Task Force, which shall formulate remedial measures using engineering and technological interventions to improve the water quality of the Manila Bay, such as sustained and targeted reduction in the coliform level in all major river systems and tributaries within the Manila Bay Region;
>
> **WHEREAS,** RA No. 11201 created the Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development as the primary national government entity responsible for the management of housing, human settlement and urban development, including the formulation of policies and programs on public housing for the homeless and underprivileged families;
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need for close coordination and oversight of all ongoing efforts of the National Government relative to the clean-up and rehabilitation of major waterways in Metro Manila; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution provides that the President has the power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices, and shall ensure the faithful execution of laws;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 2 of EO No. 54, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 2. *Composition and Membership.* The Commission shall be composed of the following:
> >
> > a) The Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources or his duly authorized representative, who shall act as its Chairman, and the Chairman of the Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA) or his duly authorized representative, who shall act as its Co-Chairman;
> >
> > b) The Secretaries and Heads of the following agencies or their respective representatives as members:
> >
> > 1. Department of Public Works and Highways;
> >
> > 2. Department of Budget and Management;
> >
> > 3. Department of Tourism;
> >
> > 4. Department of Transportation;
> >
> > 5. Department of Finance;
> >
> > 6. Department of Trade and Industry;
> >
> > 7. Department of National Defense;
> >
> > 8. Department of the Interior and Local Government;
> >
> > 9. Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development;
> >
> > 10. Office of the Executive Secretary; and
> >
> > c) Three (3) representatives from the Private Sector to be appointed by the President."
>
> **Section 2.** Except for the foregoing amendments, all other provisions of EO No. 54 shall remain unchanged.
>
> **Section 3.** All executive orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** This Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> **DONE,** in the City of Manila, this 28th day of August , in the year our Lord, Two Thousand Nineteen.
>
> (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
