Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

PB No. **196**

INTRODUCED BY PRINCIPAL AUTHORS:
**HON. RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR., HON. AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**

CO-AUTHORS:
**HON. LAISA M. ALAMIA, HON. SUHARTO AMBOLODTO, HON. RASUL E. ISMAEL, HON. DON MUSTAPHA LOONG, HON. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, HON. EDDIE ALIH, HON. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM, HON. TARHATA MAGLANGIT, HON. KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., HON. HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN, HON. RANDOLPH PARCASIO, HON. ISHAK V. MASTURA, HON. BASSIR D. UTTO, HON. IBRAHIM D. ALI**

**AN ACT RECOGNIZING AND DECLARING THE BANGSAMORO HOLIDAYS TO BE OBSERVED IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

Be it ordained by the Bangsamoro Parliament, in session assembled:

**Section 1. SHORT TITLE** – This Act shall be known as **“BANGSAMORO LEGAL HOLIDAYS”**.

**Section 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY** – It is a policy of the Bangsamoro Government to recognize and declare Bangsamoro legal holidays pursuant to Republic Act No. 11054 to celebrate and/or commemorate religious, cultural and historical events in the Bangsamoro Autonomous region as regular non-working holidays. It also allows the observance of the anniversaries of the different LGUs within the Bangsamoro Autonomous region as local Special Holidays.

Towards this end, the Bangsamoro Government shall exercise the power to ensure and support the preservation and enrichment of the Bangsamoro culture, celebrate significant historic events, and honor Bangsamoro heroes. Nothing in this Act shall preclude the observance of declared National Holidays.

**Section 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS**

a.) **Regular Non-Working Holidays** – are those national and regional holidays provided by law, which are observed annually throughout the area of Bangsamoro in observance of historical, religious and no longer need the proclamation by the Chief Minister.

b.) **Special holidays** – refers to non-regular holidays in the region and certain LGUs in observance of historical, religious and other significant events which need official proclamation from the Chief Minister.

**Section 4. DECLARATION OF HOLIDAYS** – as provided for in the Republic Act No. 11054 and pursuant to Bangsamoro Autonomy Act No. 13 otherwise known as the Bangsamoro Administrative Code which mandates the Parliament to enact a law to identify the holidays to be observed in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

In addition to the National holidays, the following shall also be observed as the regional non-working holidays throughout the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region:

1. Bangsamoro Foundation Day - 21 of January
2. Eid-ul-Fitr (Hari Raya Puasa) - Movable date
3. Eid-ul-Adha (Hari Raya Haji) - Movable date
4. Jabidah Commemoration Day - 18 March
5. Sheik Karimul Makhdum Day - 7 November

**Section 5. DATE OF OBSERVANCE** – Except for the holidays with specific date provided under Section 4, the approximate dates of the Eidl Fitr and Eidl Adha herein enumerated shall be determined in accordance with the Muslim Hijrah Calendar or based on the appearance of the moon (lunar calendar) or on Islamic Astronomical calculations, whichever is possible or convenient. For this purpose, the Chief Minister, in coordination with the Mufti of Bangsamoro Darul-Ifta’, shall make the necessary proclamation at least three (3) days before the Holiday.

The Chief Minister shall issue a proclamation on regional regular non-working holidays annually.

**Section 5. LOCAL SPECIAL HOLIDAYS** – The Chief Minister may, by official proclamation, allow the observance of the anniversary of the different LGUs and other events of religious or historical significance in the BARMM provided such unit shall notify and seek the official sanction of the Chief Minister at least fifteen (15) days before the observance of their anniversary. These shall be considered as Special Non-Working Holidays.

The Sangguniang Panlalawigan, Sangguniang Panlungsod or Sangguniang Bayan, is hereby authorized to declare by ordinance, special holidays to commemorate significant historic events in their respective locality, upon prior consultation with the Bangsamoro Commission for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage (BCPCH), which shall issue a prior certification as to the historical significance of the occasion. The Ministry of Labor and Employment (MOLE) shall likewise be consulted, considering the holiday’s implication relating to labor rights and privileges.

**Section 6. MASTERLIST OF LOCAL SPECIAL HOLIDAYS** – Within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the leagues of provinces, cities, and municipalities shall each submit to the BCPCH a master list of existing special local holidays in their respective member- LGUs, stating, among others, the nature, legal basis and date of declaration of such holidays. Thereupon, the BCPCH shall immediately furnish the Office of the Chief Minister the official and complete master list of all local special holidays.

**Section 7. HOLIDAY ECONOMICS** – As much as possible, the local special holidays shall be declared on a Monday. If a local special holiday falls on a day other than Monday, the local Sanggunian concerned shall have the authority to declare its observance on the nearest Monday; Provided, that the local Sanggunian concerned shall declare such change not later than three (3) months prior to its observance.

**Section 8. COVERAGE** – The foregoing holidays shall be officially observed by all private and public offices, private corporations and establishments, government owned and/or controlled corporations, including private and public schools, established and operating in the Bangsamoro Autonomous region and all other offices of the BARMM established outside Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

**Section 9. PRETERMISSION OF HOLIDAY** – Where the day, or the last day, for doing any act required or permitted by law falls on a regular holiday or special holiday, the act may be done on the next succeeding business day.

**Section 10. APPLICABILITY OF THE LABOR CODE** – For employees in the private sector, the compensation for regular holidays and special non-working holidays shall be consistent with the provisions of the Labor Code and its implementing rules and regulations.

**Section 11. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE** – If any provisions or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional or contrary to the provisions of Republic Act No. 11054, the same shall not apply to the validity and effectivity of the other provisions not affected thereby.

**Section 12. REPEALING CLAUSE** – All laws, orders and memoranda or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, and/or modified accordingly.

**Section 13. EFFECTIVITY** – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

This Act is enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao on _______________.

**APPROVED:**

AUTHOR:
(Sgd.)
**HON. RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR.**

Certified correct:
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested:
**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

