Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**SECOND PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

Parliament PB No. **296**

Introduced by
**MPS AMIR MAWALLIL, RASOL MITMUG JR, HASHEMI DILANGALEN, HAMID MALIK**

Co-authored by
**MPS LAISA ALAMIA, SUHARTO AMBOLODTO, DON MUSTAPHA LOONG, BAINTAN AMPATUAN, RASUL ISMAEL**

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING AN EMERGENCY RUNWAY INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEM IN ALL PROVINCES OF THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION, AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR**

**BE IT ENACTED** by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in Parliament assembled:

**Section 1. Title.** – This act shall be known as the "*Bangsamoro Emergency Runway Act of 2023.*"

**Section 2. Declaration of Policy.** – It hereby declared the policy of the Bangsamoro Government to recognizes the importance of disaster risk reduction and management and climate change adaptation. It shall maintain appropriate disaster-preparedness units for immediate and effective relief services to victims of natural and man-made calamities. It shall also ensure the rehabilitation of calamity-affected areas and victims of calamities.

Towards this end, it shall develop and establish an emergency runway system to fill the critical logistical gaps, enabling the facilitation in the delivery of humanitarian aid, and emergency response.

**Section 3. Establishment of Emergency Runways.** – The Ministry of Transportation and Communication (MOTC), in collaboration with Bangsamoro Planning and Development Authority (BPDA), and the constituent local governments shall formulate plans in the establishment of emergency runway which shall be strategically located in the provinces. This plan shall be presented to the Bangsamoro Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (BDRRMC) for vetting.

The emergency runways shall be designed and maintained to accommodate aircraft with specifications relating to disaster response, humanitarian aid, evacuation and other response operations.

**Section 4. Specifications of the Emergency Runway.** – The Ministry of Transportation and Communications shall determine the criteria in the construction of the emergency runway, which are not limited to:

a. The emergency runway shall be strategically situated in the provinces ensuring accessibility to different types of disasters.
b. It shall be equipped with essential facilities for loading and unloading of both supplies, and personnel.
c. It shall be designed complying with all established regulations provided for laws, and to accommodate various types of aircrafts.
d. It shall be designed to withstand from recurring natural hazards such as earthquakes, ensuring its operational continuity.

**Section 5. Management of the emergency runways.** – The management, maintenance, supervision and operation of emergency runways in the provinces of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall fall under the authority of the Bangsamoro Airport Authority (BAA) of the Ministry of Transportation and Communications. The BAA shall continue to engage the constituent local government in the operation and improvement of the emergency runway.

**Section 6. Appropriations.** – The sum required in the establishment, construction, maintenance and operation of all the emergency runways in the provinces of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall form part of the annual appropriations of the Ministry of Transportation and Communications.

**Section 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations.** Within sixty (60) days upon approval of this Act, the MOTC, in consultation BPDA, MILG and BDRRMC shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.

**Section 8. Separability Clause.** If any section or part of this Act is held unconstitutional or invalid, all other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

**Section 9. Repealing Clause.** All ordinances, executive orders, administrative orders, or other rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

**Section 10. Effectivity.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the region.

Approved,

Author/s:

(Sgd.)
**AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
Member of the Parliament

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

