Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Parliament PB No. 253**

Introduced by
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**

Co-Authored by:
**MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., MP Rasul E. Ismael, MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang, MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, MP Michael E. Midtimbang, MP Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod, MP Khalid Ma-Ampor Hadji Abdullah and MP Bassir. D. Utto**


**AN ACT**
**MANDATING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AT LEAST ONE TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT (TESD) CENTER IN EVERY MUNICIPALITY/CITY IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM), APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

*Be it enacted by the Parliament of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao assembled:*

**Section 1. Title.** – This Act shall be known as the “**One TESD Training Center per Municipality/City Act of 2023**”.

**Section 2. Declaration of Policy.** – It shall be the declared policy of the Bangsamoro Government to ensure that every Bangsamoro is provided with necessities and equal opportunities in life through development programs that can enhance their knowledge, skills and work values that can prepare them to engage in gainful employment and entrepreneurship.

Towards this end, the Bangsamoro Government shall guarantee the provision of a quality and accessible education to all through the establishment of one (1) Technical Education and Skills Development Center per municipality/city throughout the Bangsamoro region.

**Section 3. Creation of One (1) TESD Center per Municipality/City.** – There is hereby established one (1) training and assessment center per municipality/city in the BARMM under the supervision of Ministry of Basic, Higher, and Technical Education Authority (MBHTE), hereinafter referred to as the Centers.

The Centers established under this Act shall be located in a most accessible area of the municipality/city.

**Section 4. Mandate.** – The Centers shall provide the following:

a) Technical-vocational training and skills development programs to students and local residents from low-income families and out-of-school youth, including persons with disabilities and indigenous peoples to help them become productive and self-reliant, while also develop into a globally competitive skilled labor force to hasten the social and economic development of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

b) Effective employment interventions through training programs on relevant skills trade competencies, craftsmanship, and entrepreneurship activities that will help fasten the development of the host area into human resource and productivity hubs;

c) Render relevant teachers’ training and curriculum design assistance to the secondary schools offering the technical-vocational education under the K-12 Program in coordination with Ministry of Basic, Higher and Technical Education (MBHTE) and TESDA; and

d) Serve as TESDA/MBHTE-accredited Assessment Centers for acquired competencies in technical-vocational skills.

**Section 5. Curricular Offerings.** – The TESD Centers shall offer short-term courses in preferred market-driven and relevant technical-vocational courses within its areas of specialization in consultation with the Ministry of Labor and Employment (MOLE) and such other relevant agencies, both local and international.

The Centers shall also spearhead training programs in new skills that respond to market trends, with the goal of achieving attaining a robust and inclusive economy of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

**Section 6. School Site.** – The TESD Centers shall be established on a site in the municipality/city which is highly accessible pursuant to the purposes of this Act and the mutual agreement between the MBHTE and the concerned local government unit (LGU).

**Section 7. Administration.** – The Centers shall be headed by a Technical-Vocational Administrator, herein referred to as the Administrator, under the supervision of the MBHTE. The Administrator shall be appointed by the Minister of the MBHTE in accordance with civil service rules and regulations and the qualification requirements.

The Administrator shall render full-time services and shall be responsible for the administration and operation of the Centers established under this Act.

**Section 7. Compliance with Requirements.** – The Centers shall only become operational only upon the issuance by the MBHTE of a formal recommendation and certificate of compliance attesting that the Centers have satisfactorily complied with the minimum standards of quality it has prescribed governing the following:

a. Standard procedures and guidelines for the establishment and operation of the Center;

b. Operational sustainability of the Centers, in terms of licensed faculty-trainers and personnel, equipment, training and laboratory facilities, instructional materials, and other standard requirements of a Center;

c. Assurance that the training programs offered are fully aligned with the minimum standards of competency-based quality technical-vocational skills technology and the needs of the host locality; and

d. Compliance with such other conditionalities and standards, as may be necessary and applicable in establishing a Center.

**Section 8. Position Structure and Staffing Pattern.** – The position structure and staffing pattern of the centers established under this Act shall be in accordance with Civil Service Law, rules, and regulations. The positions created thereunder shall be filled with regular appointments.

**Section 9. Faculty.** – No political beliefs, gender preferences, cultural or community affiliation, ethnic origin, and religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of faculty members of the centers established under this Act.

**Section 10. Coverage.** – This Act shall cover all the municipalities/cities within the territorial jurisdiction of the BARMM.

**Section 11. Annual Report to the Parliament.** – The Administrator shall submit a report to the Parliament within one year from the implementation of this Act, and every year thereafter, on the progress of the implementation of this Act.

**Section 12. Implementation.** – Within sixty (60) days from the promulgation of this Act, the necessary rules and regulations for the proper implementation of its provision shall be formulated by the Ministry of Labor and Employment (MOLE), Ministry of Trade, Investments and Tourism (MTIT), Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Agrarian Reform (MAFAR), and Ministry of the Interior and Local Government (MILG), in coordination with the MBHTE and such other relevant agencies.

**Section 13. Mandatory Review on the Implementation of this Act.** – Every ten (10) years after the effectivity of this Act, an independent review panel composed of experts, to be appointed by the Chief Minister, shall review the implementation of this Act and shall make recommendations, based on its findings, to the Chief Minister and to the Parliament.

**Section 14. Appropriations.** – The funds necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual appropriations of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and submitted to the Parliament for its approval.

**Section 15. Separability Clause.** – If for any cause, any part of this Act is declared unconstitutional or contrary to the provisions of Bangsamoro Organic Law, the rest of the provisions shall remain in force and effect.

**Section 16. Repealing Clause.** – All laws, orders, rules, and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed, modified, superseded, or amended accordingly.

**Section 17. Effectivity.** – This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following its complete publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

Adopted,

(Sgd.)
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Author

