Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

BTA PB No. **350**

Introduced by

**MP KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., MD, MP ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG, MP HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN, MD, MP PROF. EDDIE M. ALIH, MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG JR., MP ATTY. PAISALIN TAGO, MP ATTY. ISHAK V. MASTURA, MP ATTY. NABIL A. TAN**

Co-authors :

**MP ALI MONTAHA D. BABAO, MP KHALID M. HADJI ABDULLAH, MP SAID M. SHEIK, MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, MP ATTY. MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN, MP ALBAKIL D. JIKIRI, MP NURREDHA I. MISUARI, MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO, MP FROILYN T. MENDOZA, MP DIAMILA D. RAMOS, MP ATTY, MP ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**

**AN ACT**
**UPGRADING THE EXISTING DR. SERAPIO B. MONTANER JR., AL HAJ MEMORIAL HOSPITAL (DSBMMH) FROM TWENTY-FIVE (25) TO ONE HUNDRED (100) BED CAPACITY, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao:

**Section 1. Title.** - This Act shall be known as the **DR. SERAPIO B. MONTANER JR. MEMORIAL HOSPITAL ACT OF 2025.**

**Section 2. Declaration of Policy.** - It is hereby declared the policy of the Bangsamoro Government to maintain and ensure the delivery of basic and responsive health programs, promote the right to health of the Bangsamoro people, instill health consciousness among them, and adopt a comprehensive and integrated health service delivery for its constituents.

**Section 3. Upgrading of the DSBMMH.** - The DSBMMH is hereby upgraded from its present Twenty-five (25) bed capacity to one hundred (100) bed capacity in accordance with the National Level Classification Standards set by the Department of Health.

**Section 4. Manpower Requirement.** - The existing manpower of the DSBMMH, which includes Doctors, Nurses, Midwives, and other Health Practitioners and support personnel shall be increased correspondingly in accordance with Civil Service Commission rules and regulations.

**Section 5. Administration, Management, and Operation.** - The DSBMMH shall remain under the administrative supervision and control of the Ministry of Health which shall approve the appropriate organizational structure and personnel, hospital plans, programs, and activities for its effective management and operation of the herein-mentioned upgraded hospital.

**Section 6. Appropriations.** - The Ministry of Health shall immediately include in the Ministry’s program the implementation of this Act, the necessary funding of which shall be included in the Annual Bangsamoro Appropriations Act.

**Section 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations.** - Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Finance, Budget, and Management shall promulgate the appropriate Implementing Rules and Regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

**Section 8. Separability Clause.** - The provisions of this Act are hereby declared separable, in the event one or more provisions or part thereof are declared unconstitutional, such declaration of unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the other provisions thereof.

**Section 9. Repealing Clause.** - All regional laws, acts, decrees, executive orders, proclamations, and/or administrative regulations inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby amended, modified, superseded, or repealed accordingly.

**Section 10. Effectivity.** - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the region.

Introduced by:

(Signed)
**KADIL JOJO M. SINOLINDING JR., MD, DBPO**
Member of Parliament

**MP DR. HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN**
Member of the Parliament

**MP PROF. EDDIE M. ALIH**
Member of the Parliament

**MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG JR.**
Member of the Parliament

**MP ATTY. PAISALIN TAGO**
Member of the Parliament

**MP ATTY. ISHAK V. MASTURA**
Member of the parliament

**MP ATTY. NABIL A. TAN**
Member of the Parliament

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker

