Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

BTA PARLIAMENT
Third Regular Session

Parliament PB No. **323**

Introduced by

**Members of Parliament JAMEL B. MACACUA and MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**

Co-Authors:

**Members of Parliament Basit S. Abbas, Mudjib C. Abu, Ibrahim D. Ali, Abdulaziz M. Amenodin, Mohammad Kelei U Antao, Hatimil E. Hassan, Rasul E. Ismael, Don Mustapha A. Loong, Atty. Jose I. Lorena, Tarhata T. Maglangit, Nurredha I. Misuari, and Nabila Margarita P. Pangandaman**

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A COMPREHENSIVE FRAMEWORK FOR ACKNOWLEDGING AND REWARDING OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE AMONG BANGSAMORO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES, THROUGH A POINTS-BASED SYSTEM, AND PROVIDING GUIDELINES FOR THE CONVERSION OF EARNED POINTS INTO LEAVE BENEFITS**

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in Parliament assembled:

**SECTION 1. Short Title.** This act shall be known as the “Performance Based Service Leave Benefits Act of 2024”.

**SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy and Principles.** The Bangsamoro Government shall adopt measures to promote morale and the highest degree of responsibility, morality, integrity, efficiency, and professionalism in the civil service. This is to ensure that the Bangsamoro civil servants can effectively and efficiently discharge their respective services for the Bangsamoro people.

Giving merits and rewards to deserving government employees shall likewise be observed to encourage the efficient and effective performance of governmental functions.

In the exercise of self-governance, the Bangsamoro Government shall guarantee the protection of the morale of its employees. The government must strengthen the merit and reward system for the Bangsamoro civil servants that shall ultimately redound to the benefit of its constituents.

**SECTION 3. Definition of Terms.** For purposes of this act, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

a. **Performance Evaluation** – refers to the individual performance rating for each government employee that shall be done twice in every calendar year.

b. **Permanent Status** – refers to a person who meets all the requirements for the positions to which he is being appointed, including the appropriate eligibility prescribed, in accordance with the provisions of law, rules, and standards promulgated in pursuance thereof.

c. **Service Credit** – refers to the number of days of leave earned by the employee who has a Very Satisfactory rating for two (2) consecutive performance evaluation ratings.

d. **Service Leave** – the enjoyment of service credit as defined under this act.

e. **Very Satisfactory (VS)** – refers to a rating scale in the performance evaluation of every employee when the employee’s performance exceeds expectations. This rating shall be given when all goals, objectives, and targets are achieved above the established standards.

**SECTION 4. Scope and Coverage.** This Bangsamoro Act shall apply to all officials and employees of the Bangsamoro government with Permanent status of appointment.

It provides the guidelines and procedures for the conversion of performance ratings attained by qualified officials or employees, as provided for under this act, into service credit.

**SECTION 5. General Guidelines.** The following are the general guidelines for the qualified officials or employees of the Bangsamoro government who wish to avail of the conversion of performance rating into credit leave, as provided for under this act:

a. A maximum of three (3) days of credit service shall be allowed every calendar year for every official or employee of the Bangsamoro government who has been or shall be rated with at least a Very Satisfactory (VS) rating for two (2) successive rating period in the official or employee’s performance evaluation;

b. The performance evaluation qualified for the conversion under this act must be converted into service leave in the immediately succeeding year from the issuance of such performance evaluation, otherwise, such privilege shall be deemed forfeited;

c. Service credits earned from the conversion of performance rating must be availed within the year of conversion, otherwise, such service leave shall be deemed converted;

d. In no case shall service credit earned from the conversion of ratings be added to the Accumulated Leave Credits to be used in the computation of Terminal Leave Benefits of retiring PNP personnel, as provided by existing laws and regulations;

e. There shall be a one-time and complete utilization of the approved converted service credits, otherwise, the unused service credit for such conversion shall be forfeited;

f. Personnel may only avail service credit after he has availed of the mandatory/forced leave as provided for in the existing laws and regulations;

g. Any personnel who transferred employment to another office, within the Bangsamoro government, shall bring with him/her the certified true copy of his/her service credit/leave record and shall turn over the same to the Human Resources Section of the office where he/she currently employed;

h. Utilization of service credit/leave under this act shall be subject to existing rules and regulations;

i. There shall be no cancellation of approved service leaves except in the exigency of the service; and

j. The application of service leave under this act shall be separate and distinct from other leaves.

**SECTION 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations.** The Bangsamoro Civil Service Commission for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (CSC for BARMM) shall promulgate and issue implementing rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this act within sixty (60) upon its effectivity.

**SECTION 7. Separability Clause.** If any provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

**SECTION 8. Repealing Clause.** All laws, decrees, orders, rules, and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

**SECTION 9. Effectivity.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

APPROVED,

Author:

(Sgd.)
**HON. JAMEL B. MACACUA**
Member of Parliament – Bangsamoro Transition Authority

(Sgd.)
**HON. MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**
Member of Parliament – Bangsamoro Transition Authority

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary-General

Attested:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

