Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

Third Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
BTA Parliament PB No. **413**

Introduced by:
MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, CSEE, MNSA

Co-Authored by:
MP Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod; MP Khalid Ma-Ampor Hadji Abdullah; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, MNSA; MP Rasul E. Ismael, EMDRCM; MP Atty. Rasol Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; MP Michael E. Midtimbang

**AN ACT**
**CREATING BANGSAMORO GRAND ATHLETIC AND SPORTS COMPLEXES IN COTABATO CITY AND LAMITAN CITY, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

Be it enacted by the Parliament of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao assembled:

**Section 1. Title.** - This Act shall be known as the “*Bangsamoro Grand Athletic Act of 2025*”.

**Section 2. Declaration of Policy.** - It is hereby declared the policy of the Bangsamoro Government to prioritize arts, culture, and sports as essential components of nation-building, youth empowerment, community development. It is further recognized that the Bangsamoro Government shall encourage sports programs, league competitions, and amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to foster self-discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry.

Towards this end, the Bangsamoro Government shall safeguard the welfare of the Bangsamoro youth by establishing sports facilities - including their construction, improvement, and maintenance - that meet international standards and support the development of Bangsamoro athletes.

**Section 3. Creation of the Bangsamoro Grand Athletic and Sports Complexes.** - There are hereby established Bangsamoro Grand Athletic and Sports Complexes in Cotabato City and Lamitan City and hereinafter referred to as the “*Complexes.*”

The Complexes shall serve as the primary Bangsamoro sports development and training centers for athletes, coaches, and other sports personnel in Cotabato City and Lamitan City, and neighboring municipalities and cities.

**Section 4. Sustainability Plan.** - The Bangsamoro Sports Commission (BSC) is hereby mandated to formulate a sustainability plan for the Complexes.

The BSC may coordinate with relevant government agencies, including but not limited to the Ministry of Public Works (MPW) and other appropriate ministries and offices.

The sustainability plan shall include the following:

a. Proper usage and management of the Complexes;
b. Regular maintenance, repair, improvement, and renovation of the Complexes;
c. Income generating activities sufficient to help cover the maintenance, operation, repair improvement costs;
d. Waste management, recycling and composting system; and
e. All other necessary and essential systems and strategies determined by the BSC.

The sustainability plan shall be reviewed and updated at least once every five (5) years, or as often as necessary based on the condition and operational needs of the Complexes.

**Section 5. Mandatory Review of the Implementation of this Act.** - Every five (5) years after the effectivity of this Act, an independent review panel composed of experts, appointed by the Chief Minister, shall review the implementation of this Act and make recommendations to the Chief Minister and the Parliament.

**Section 6. Appropriations.** - The amount necessary for the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the Contingent Fund. Thereafter, such amounts as may be necessary for the continued implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual budget of the BSC under the Bangsamoro Appropriations Act.

**Section 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations.** - The BSC shall issue the implementing rules and regulations within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act.

**Section 8. Separability Clause.** - If any provisions of this Act is declared unconstitutional or contrary to the Bangsamoro Organic Law, the remaining provisions shall remain in force and effect.

**Section 9. Repealing Clause.** - All laws, orders, rules, and regulations that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed, modified, superseded, or amended accordingly.

**Section 10. Effectivity.** - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao or in the Bangsamoro Gazette.

Adopted,

MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA
Author

