Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**SECOND PARLIAMENT**
First Regular Session

**Parliament PB No. 79**

Introduced by
**MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
Co-authored by
**ATTY. LAISA MASUHUD ALAMIA, ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN, ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR., ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO, RASUL E. ISMAEL, ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG**

**AN ACT**
**REDUCING THE COST OF ELECTRICITY FOR BANGSAMORO GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND BUILDINGS BY PROMOTING THE DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION OF SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS, PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

**Section 1. Short Title.** – This Act shall be known as the **“Solar Energy in Bangsamoro Government Offices Act of 2022.”**

**Section 2. Declaration of Policy and Principles.** – It is the declared policy of the Bangsamoro Government to promote investments in the energy and power generation sector, and as far as practicable, promote low carbon sustainable power generation policies, as provided in the Bangsamoro Organic Law.

Towards this end, it shall mandate the development and utilization of renewable energy sources in all Bangsamoro government buildings and offices to ensure an efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable supply of power from solar energy systems.

**Section 3. Definition of terms.** – For purposes of this Act, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

a. “Solar Energy” refers to radiant energy (direct, diffused, or reflected) received from the sun at wavelengths suitable for conversion into thermal, chemical, or electrical energy;
b. “Solar Energy System” refers to an energy system that consists of one or more solar collection devices, solar energy-related “balance of system” equipment, and other associated infrastructure with the primary intention of generating electricity, storing electricity, or otherwise converting solar energy to usable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy to meet all or a significant part of a structure’s energy requirements.

**Section 4. Coverage.** – This Act shall cover all offices in the Bangsamoro Government including, but not limited to, the Bangsamoro Parliament; the ministries, agencies, bureaus, commissions, boards, and instrumentalities of the Bangsamoro Government; and Bangsamoro Government-owned or controlled corporations.

**Section 5. Installation of Solar Energy Systems in Bangsamoro Government Buildings.** – All Bangsamoro government agencies, in coordination with the Ministry of Public Works and the Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources, and Energy shall begin the construction of solar energy systems and retrofit their respective buildings and offices within one (1) year after the effectivity of this Act.

The solar energy systems shall be gradually increased annually for five (5) years thereafter, at which time the established solar energy systems are expected to have a capacity to supply fifty percent (50%) of the power requirements of all Bangsamoro government agencies.

The sum allocated for the integration of solar energy systems shall include the cost of its installation, upkeep, and maintenance.

**Section 6. General Guidelines.** – For the purpose of this Act, the following are the general guidelines for solar energy systems in all socialized housing programs in the BARMM:

a. Establishment and construction shall immediately commence supplying power, as an accessory use, to all offices and buildings of the Bangsamoro Government in the BARMM;
b. Bangsamoro Government offices with installed solar energy systems shall enjoy the privileges granted to qualified end-users, as certified by the DOE Renewable Energy Management Bureau, as provided for in Sections 10 and 12 of R.A. No. 9513.

**Section 7. General Guidelines.** – Within ninety (90) days from the passage of this Act, the Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources, and Energy, in close coordination with the Ministry of Science and Technology and renewable energy stakeholders shall determine the guidelines or added requirements that must be integrated into the installation of solar energy systems.

Provisions relating to height, setbacks, aesthetics/screening, and impervious coverage shall be included in the guidelines, in addition to site plan review standards and unique approval standards imposed upon specific types of solar energy systems, upon specific areas, or be generally applied to all solar energy systems.

**Section 8. Appropriations.** – Such sums as may be necessary for the initial implementation of this Act shall be taken from the current appropriations of the Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources, and Energy. Thereafter, the fund necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act of the Bangsamoro.

**Section 9. Separability Clause.** – If any provision of this Act shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, the other provisions not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

**Section 10. Repealing Clause.** – All laws, executive orders or issuances, or any parts thereof which are inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

**Section 11. Effectivity Clause.** – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of regional circulation.

Adopted,

AUTHOR:
(Sgd.)
**AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
Member of the Parliament

Certified correct:
(Sgd.)
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary-General

Attested by:
(Sgd.)
**ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

