Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Parliament PB No. 94**

Introduced by:
MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA
MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL, MPSA

Co-authors:
MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, MPSA; MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Rasul E. Ismael; MP Diamila D. Ramos; MP Susana S. Anayatin; MP Khalid Ma-Amor Hadji Abdullah; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; MP Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod; MP Nabila Margarita P. Pangandaman; MP Bassir D. Utto; MP Froilyn T. Mendoza; Mohammad Kelie U. Antao

**AN ACT PROMOTING THE SAFETY AND WELFARE OF THE BANGSAMORO MINORS, PROVIDING FOR THE GENERAL GUIDELINES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A CURFEW FOR MINORS IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM)**

*Be it enacted by the Parliament of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao assembled:*

**Section 1. Title.** – This Act shall be known as the “*BARMM General Curfew for Minors Act*”.

**Section 2. Declaration of State Policy.** – It is the declared policy of the State:

a. to recognize the vital role of the youth in nation-building and to promote and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social well-being. It shall inculcate in the youth patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in public and civic affairs;
b. to respect, protect, and promote the rights of children, especially orphans of tender age. They shall be protected from exploitation, abuse or discrimination. Bangsamoro policies and programs shall also take into utmost consideration the best interest of children, and promote and protect the rights of children, youth, and adolescents, including their survival and development;
c. to defend the right of children to assistance, including proper care and nutrition, and special protection from all forms of neglect, abuse, cruelty, exploitation, and other conditions prejudicial to their development.

**Section 3. Definition of terms.** – The terms used in this Act shall mean the following:

a. **Minor** refers to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
b. **Parent*** refers to both biological and adoptive parents who have actual custody of the minor.
c. **Guardian*** refers to:
1. a person, under court order, who is appointed as the guardian of the person of the minor;
2. a public or private agency, under court order, with whom a minor has been placed under custody of;
3. a person charged with actual custody of the minor and is taking care of the minor, absent the parents, whether a relative or not; or
4. a person, at least 18 years of age, and authorized by a parent or guardian to accompany the minor in a public place.
d. **Public place** is any place located within the territorial jurisdiction of the BARMM, which is accessible or open to the general public ,or a substantial amount of people, or places for collective use, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, plazas, parking lots, vacant lots, malls, stores, and other common areas in churches or places of congregational prayer, schools, shops, and places of entertainment such as theaters, cinemas, and arcades, and other similar places or establishments.
e. **Residence** means the house or home where the minor and his/her parent(s) or guardian(s) actually live.
f. **Emergency*** means any unforeseen or fortuitous circumstance(s) that call for immediate action, including, but not limited to, natural calamities like earthquakes, floods, and the like, as well as man-induced dangers or calamities such as fires, or any situation requiring an immediate response to prevent serious bodily injuries or loss of life.
g. **Law Enforcement Officer** refers to the person in authority or his or her agent, as defined in Article 152 of the Revised Penal Code of the Philippines, including a barangay tanod.
h. **Best Interest of the Child** refers to the totality of the circumstances and conditions which are most congenial to the survival, protection and feelings of security of the child and most encouraging to the child’s physical, psychological and emotional development. It also means the least detrimental available alternative for safeguarding the growth and development of the child.
i. **Child** refers to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
j. **Child at Risk** refers to a child who is vulnerable to and at the risk of committing criminal offenses because of personal, family and social circumstances, such as, but not limited to, the following:
1. being abused by any person through sexual, physical, psychological, mental, economic or any other means and the parents or guardian refuse, are unwilling, or unable to provide protection for the child;
2. being exploited including sexually or economically;
3. being abandoned or neglected, and after diligent search and inquiry, the parent or guardian cannot be found;
4. coming from a dysfunctional or broken family or without a parent or guardian;
5. being out of school;
6. being a street child;
7. being a member of a gang;
8. living in a community with a high level of criminality or drug abuse; and
9. living in situations of armed conflict.
k. **Child in Conflict with the Law** refers to a child who is alleged as, accused of, or adjudged as, having committed an offense under Philippine laws.
l. **Court** refers to a family court or, in places where there are no family courts, any regional trial court.
m. **Habitual Violator*** refers to a minor who has repeatedly violated the Act more than three (3) times.


**Section 4. Curfew.** – There shall be imposed a 10:00 pm to 4:00 am for all minors in the BARMM.

**Section 5. Prohibited Activities.** – The following are prohibited under this Act:

(a) A minor is prohibited from roaming around, loitering, wandering, staying, meandering, or remaining in all public places during the mandated curfew hours, whether alone or in groups, without lawful purpose or justifiable reason;
(b) A parent or guardian is prohibited from knowingly permitting, or by insufficient control, allowing the minor to loiter, wander, stay, meander, or remain in any public place within the territorial jurisdiction of the BARMM.

**Section 6. Exceptions.** – Minor children under the following circumstances shall not be covered by the provisions of this Act:

a. Those accompanied or authorized in writing to run lawful errands or engage in legitimate activities during the night by their parents or guardian;
b. Those on their way to or from a lawful activity, graduation ceremony, religious activity, and/or other extra-curricular activities of sanctioned by their school or legitimate civic organization, in writing, wherein their attendance are required or otherwise indispensable, or when such minors are out and unable to go home early due to circumstances beyond their control, as verified by the proper authorities concerned; and
c. Those attending to, or in experience of, an emergency situation such as conflagration, earthquake, hospitalization, road accident, law enforcers encounter, and similar incidents;
d. When the minor is engaged in an authorized employment activity, or going to or returning home from the same place of employment activity without any detour or stop;
e. When the minor is in a motor vehicle or other travel accompanied by an adult in no violation of this Ordinance;
f. When the minor is involved in an emergency;
g. When the minor is out of his/her residence attending an official school, religious, recreational, educational, social, community or other similar private activity sponsored by the city, barangay, school, or other similar private civic/religious organization/group (recognized by the community) that supervises the activity or when the minor is going to or returning home from such activity, without any detour or stop; and
h. When the minor can present papers certifying that he/she is a student and was dismissed from his/her class/es in the evening or that he/she is a working student.

**Section. Determination of Age.** – The age of the child may be determined from the child’s birth certificate, baptismal certificate, or any other pertinent documents. In the absence of these documents, age may be based on information from the child himself/herself, testimonies of other persons, the physical appearance of the child, and other relevant evidence. In case of doubt as to the age of the child, it shall be resolved in his/her favor.

**Section 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations.** – Each local government unit (LGU) is directed to formulate implementing rules and regulations as may be warranted by local conditions.

**Section 8. Barangay Council for the Protection of Children (BCPC).** – The BCPC is tasked to take custody of the child for violating this Act and to conduct intervention programs, such as counseling, and secure the attendance in group activities for children, and for the parents, attendance in parenting education seminars.

**Section 8. Enforcement Procedure.** – In compliance with R.A. 9344 or the Juvenile Justice Welfare Act of 2006, the law enforcement officer, enforcing action under this ordinance, shall observe Section 21 of R.A. 9344 in dealing with a minor or minors believed to be in violation of this Act. The said provision states:

> **Section 21. Procedure for Taking the Child into Custody.** – *From the moment a child is taken into custody, the law enforcement officer shall:*
> 
> (a) *Explain to the child in simple language and in a dialect that he/she can understand why he/she is being placed under custody and the offense that he/she allegedly committed;*
> 
> (b) *Inform the child of the reason for such custody and advise the child of his/her constitutional rights in a language or dialect understood by him/her;*
> 
> (c) *Properly identify himself/herself and present proper identification to the child;*
> 
> (d) *Refrain from using vulgar or profane words and from sexually harassing or abusing, or making sexual advances on the child in conflict with the law;*
> 
> (e) *Avoid displaying or using any firearm, weapon, handcuffs or other instruments of force or restraint, unless absolutely necessary and only after all other methods of control have been exhausted and have failed;*
> 
> (f) *Refrain from subjecting the child in conflict with the law to greater restraint than is necessary for his/her apprehension;*
> 
> (g) *Avoid violence or unnecessary force;*
> 
> (h) *Determine the age of the child pursuant to Section 7 of this Act;*
> 
> (i) *Immediately but not later than eight (8) hours after apprehension, turn over custody of the child to a member of the BCPC and notify the child’s apprehension. Any member of the BCPC shall explain to the child and the child’s parents/guardians the consequences of the child’s act and without delay, conduct counseling and rehabilitation, diversion from the criminal justice system, and reparation, if appropriate;*
> 
> (j) *Take the child immediately to the proper medical and health officer for a thorough physical and mental examination. The examination results shall be kept confidential unless otherwise ordered by the Family Court. Whenever the medical treatment is required, steps shall be immediately undertaken to provide the same;*
> 
> (k) *Ensure that should detention of the child in conflict with the law be necessary, the child shall be secured in quarters separate from that of the opposite sex and adult offenders;*
> 
> (l) *Record the following in the initial investigation:*
> 1. *Whether handcuffs or other instruments of restraint were used, and if so, the reason for such;*
> 2. *That the parents or guardian of a child, the DSWD, and the PAO have been informed of the apprehension and the details thereof; and*
> 3. *The exhaustion of measures to determine the age of a child and the precise details of the physical and medical examination or the failure to submit a child to such examination; and*
> 
> (m) *Ensure that all statements signed by the child during investigation shall be witnessed by the child’s parents or guardian, social worker, or legal counsel in attendance who shall affix his/her signature to the said statement.*

A child in conflict with the law shall only be searched by a law enforcement officer of the same gender and shall not be locked up in a detention cell.

**Section 9. Obligations and Responsibility of Parents or Guardians.** – The parent(s) or guardian(s) are mandated to supervise the conduct and activities of their minor children and to see to it that the latter are already in their home prior to and until after the occurrence of the curfew.


**Section 10. Responsibility of the Community.** – Any person who has personal knowledge of the presence of any minor in any public place during the curfew hours must immediately call the attention of any law enforcement officer.

**Section 11. Barangay Curfew for Minors Logbook.** – Each BCPC shall keep a logbook, digitized or manual, or both, depending on the situation of the Barangay, the purpose of which is for the recording of the names of the children who violated the said curfew. Recording of the names of the children shall, in no way, mean that they have committed a criminal offense or have incurred a criminal record.

The logbook will only be for the determination of the number of offenses of the child, and shall be secured and protected at all times. For this purpose, all BCPCs shall implement reasonable and appropriate organizational physical and technical measures intended for the protection of personal information against any accidental or unlawful access, fraudulent misuse, and disclosure, as well as against any other unlawful processing.

**Section 12. Manner of Dealing with the Violator.** – As provided under Section 57-A of R.A. 9344, ordinances enacted by local governments concerning juvenile status offenses such as but not limited to, curfew violations, shall be for the protection of children. Thus, no penalty shall be imposed on the child for said violations. However, the child’s parent(s) or guardian(s) may be meted with a fine or penalized, or both. However, the child and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be subject to the following consequences:

(a) **FIRST OFFENSE.** – The child found to be in violation of this act, for the first time, shall be brought to their residence or to any barangay official at the barangay. The name of the child shall be recorded in the logbook of the Barangay for the first offense.

The BCPC shall conduct a counseling for the child with his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) before releasing the child to the latter’s custody. The counseling shall take place either at home or the nearest barangay, whichever is applicable in the context of the situation.

The child, along with his or her parent(s) or guardians(s) will be admonished of the consequences that they will be dealing with in case of a subsequent and second violation of the minor.

(b) **SECOND OFFENSE.** – The child found to be in violation of this act, for the second time, shall be brought to any barangay official at the barangay. The name of the child shall be recorded in the logbook of the Barangay for the second offense.

The child and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be required to attend THREE (3) consecutive regular sessions of the BCPC for counseling. The BCPC shall certify the compliance or non-compliance of the concerned minor and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s). The parent(s) or guardian(s) shall see to it that the certification be presented to the Barangay or the apprehending officer in a period of no more than one (1) month.

Moreover, the child and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be required to render 48 hours of community service. The parent (s) or the guardian(s) will be required to settle a fine of Two Thousand Pesos (Php 2,000.00).

The child, along with his or her parent(s) or guardians(s), will also be admonished of the consequences that they will be dealing with in case of a third and subsequent violation of the minor.

(c) **THIRD OFFENSE.** – The child found to be in violation of this act, for the third time, shall be brought to any barangay official at the barangay. The name of the child shall be recorded in the logbook of the Barangay for the third offense.

The child shall also be recorded as a "**child at risk**" and NOT as a "child in conflict with the law."

The child and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be required to attend FIVE (5) consecutive regular sessions of the BCPC for counseling. The BCPC shall certify the compliance or non-compliance of the concerned minor and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s). The parent(s) or guardian(s) shall see to it that the certification be presented to the Barangay or the apprehending officer in a period of no more than two months.

Moreover, the child and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be required to render 120 hours of community service. Moreover, the parent(s) or the guardian(s) will be required to settle a fine of five thousand pesos (Php 5,000.00).

The child, along with his or her parent(s) or guardians(s), will also be admonished of the consequences that they will be dealing with in case of a fourth and subsequent violation of the minor.

(d) **FOURTH AND EVERY SUCCEEDING OFFENSE.** – The child found to be in violation of this act, for the third time, shall be brought to any barangay official at the barangay. The name of the child shall be recorded in the logbook of the Barangay for every succeeding offense.

The child will be labeled, not only as a child at risk, but also as a **habitual violator** of the said Act, and will be turned over to the Department of Social Welfare and Development for counseling or for any intervention program as may be deemed appropriate by the Department.

The child’s parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be penalized with imprisonment of not less than one month, as may be deemed necessary by the Court.

**Section 12. Repealing Clause.** – Any provision of law, decree, executive orders, ordinances, rules and regulations inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

**Section 13. Separability Clause.** – If any portion or provision of this Act is declared void or unconstitutional, the remaining portions or provisions thereof shall not be affected by such declaration.

**Section 14. Effectivity.** – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

Adopted,

(Sgd.)
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Author

