# Republic Act No. 1484

**An Act Appropriating the Sum of Seventy-Five Thousand Pesos as Aid to the Philippine Public School Teachers Association, Inc. in Sponsoring the Nineteen Hundred and Fifty-Six Delegate Conference of the World Confederation of Organizations of the Teaching Profession (Wcotp), to be Held in the City of Manila and the City of Baguio in August, Nineteen Hundred and Fifty-Six**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 1484
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1956/ra_1484_1956.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 1484**
>
> **An Act Appropriating the Sum of Seventy-Five Thousand Pesos as Aid to the Philippine Public School Teachers Association, Inc. in Sponsoring the Nineteen Hundred and Fifty-Six Delegate Conference of the World Confederation of Organizations of the Teaching Profession (Wcotp), to be Held in the City of Manila and the City of Baguio in August, Nineteen Hundred and Fifty-Six**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The sum of seventy-five thousand pesos is hereby appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, as aid to the Philippine Public School Teachers Association, Inc., in sponsoring the Nineteen hundred and fifty-six Delegate Conference of the World Confederation of Organizations of the Teaching Profession (WCOTP), to be held in the City of Manila and the City of Baguio in August, nineteen hundred and fifty-six.
>
> **Section 2.** The funds herein appropriated shall be disbursed by the Secretary of the Department of Education, with the approval of the President of the Philippines, subject to the established rules and regulations governing the expenditures of public funds and all unexpended balance shall revert to the general fund.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 16, 1956.
>
>
>
