# Republic Act No. 1038

**An Act Fixing the Boundary of the Municipalities of Bagamanoc and Panganiban, Province of Catanduanes, in Accordance with the Agreement Between Said Municipalities Made on June Twelve, Nineteen Hundred Fifty-Two, and Approved by the Provincial Board of Said Province on July Twelve, Nineteen Hundred Fifty-Two in its Resolution Numbered One Hundred Twenty-Three**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 1038
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1954/ra_1038_1954.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 1038**
>
> **An Act Fixing the Boundary of the Municipalities of Bagamanoc and Panganiban, Province of Catanduanes, in Accordance with the Agreement Between Said Municipalities Made on June Twelve, Nineteen Hundred Fifty-Two, and Approved by the Provincial Board of Said Province on July Twelve, Nineteen Hundred Fifty-Two in its Resolution Numbered One Hundred Twenty-Three**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The boundary of the municipalities of Bagamanoc and Panganiban, Province of Catanduanes, as agreed upon between their respective Municipal Councils on June twelve, nineteen hundred fifty-two, and approved by the Provincial Board of said province on July twelve, nineteen hundred fifty-two, shall be as follows:
>
> The boundary of Panay Island between the municipalities of Bagamanoc and Panganiban is a straight line from Amontol Point to Tubigmanoc.1âшphi1 The territory west of the line belongs to the former municipality and the territory east of the line belongs to the latter. The boundary in Panganiban Bay is a straight line from Amontol Point to the mouth of the Pangcayanan Creek. The territory northwest of the line belongs to the former and the territory southwest of the line belongs to the latter. The boundary in the mainland of said municipalities extends from the mouth of Pangcayanan Creek following the natural course of said creek up to the concrete culvert and from that point of straight line to sitio Inacban: *Provided,* That sitio Inacban belongs to the municipality of Panganiban.
>
> **Section 2.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 12, 1954.
>
>
>
