# Republic Act No. 363

**AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS TO ADD A SURCHARGE TO THE PRICE OF GOVERNMENT-PUBLISHED ANTHOLOGIES USED AS TEXTBOOKS TO BE PAID TO THE COPYRIGHT OWNERS OF THE SELECTIONS SO USED.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 363
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1949/ra_363_1949.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 363, June 09, 1949 ]**
>
> AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS TO ADD A SURCHARGE TO THE PRICE OF GOVERNMENT-PUBLISHED ANTHOLOGIES USED AS TEXTBOOKS TO BE PAID TO THE COPYRIGHT OWNERS OF THE SELECTIONS SO USED.
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Director of Public Schools is hereby authorized to add to the delivered cost of all Government-published anthologies sold or rented as textbooks in public schools a certain percentage to be fixed by the Secretary of Education, but in no case exceeding fifteen per centum. The amount of such surcharge is hereby authorized to be disbursed and paid to the different authors of the various selections used in said anthologies on the basis of equal shares.
>
> **Section 2.** The Auditor General shall take the necessary steps the proper accounting of the surcharge herein authored to be collected and shall issue the necessary rules and regulations for the periodical payment of the royalty to the concerned, but in no case oftener than twice a year.
>
> **Section 3.** The surcharge provided for in this Act shall apply to the first delivery copies of the said textbook-anthologies bureau of Printing or any legally authorized printer after the approval of this Act.   Such copies as are subject to the Provisions of this Act shall be printed with the marks of identification.
>
> **Section 4.** Nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting the sale of old copies of these textbook-anthologies on the basis of the old prices.⚖ - ℒαɯρhi৷
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval
>
> Approved, June 9, 1949.
>
>
>
