# Republic Act No. 335

**An Act to Amend Section One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty-Nine of the Revised Administrative Code, as Amended**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 335
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1948/ra_335_1948.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 335**
>
> An Act to Amend Section One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty-Nine of the Revised Administrative Code, as Amended
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section one thousand six hundred fifty-nine of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 1659. The Office of the Solicitor General shall have one Chief to be known as Solicitor General whose salary shall be twelve thousand pesos per annum and shall have the rank of an Undersecretary of a Department. he shall be assisted by one First Assistant Solicitor General whose salary shall be nine thousand pesos per annum. When the Solicitor General is unable to perform his duties or in case of a vacancy in the office, the First Assistant Solicitor General shall temporarily perform the functions of said officer, or in his absence, the Secretary of Justice may designate the acting chief of the office. There shall also be four Assistant Solicitors General each of whom shall receive a salary of seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum, and twenty-four Solicitors whose salaries shall be as follows:
> >
> > "(a) Four Solicitors, six thousand pesos per annum each;
> >
> > "(b) Four Solicitors, five thousand four hundred pesos per annum each;
> >
> > "(c) Five Solicitors, four thousand eight hundred pesos per annum each;
> >
> > "(d) Five Solicitors, four thousand two hundred pesos per annum each;
> >
> > "(e) Six Solicitors, three thousand six hundred pesos per annum each.£á⩊phi£
> >
> > "The qualifications for appointment to the positions of Solicitor General, the First Assistant Solicitor General and the four Assistant Solicitors General shall be the same as those prescribed for Judges of the Courts of First Instance and those of Solicitors shall be the same as those prescribed for provincial fiscals."
>
> **Section 2.** To carry out the purposes of this Act and in addition to such sum as may have been provided for under current appropriation, there is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated the amount of twenty-nine thousand four hundred pesos for the fiscal year 1948-1949.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect on July 1, 1948.
>
> Approved: July 20, 1948.
>
>
>
