# Republic Act No. 7159

**AN ACT CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUIPOS IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7159
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1991/ra_7159_1991.html)

---

> **Eighth Congress**
>
>
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 7159             October 7, 1991**
>
> **AN ACT CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUIPOS IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Barangays Guipos, Katipunan, Bagong Oroquieta, and Dalapang, all in the Municipality of San Miguel; Barangays Datagan, Dagohoy, Balongating, Baguitan, Magting, Sikatuna, Dacsol, Guling, and Canunan, all in the Municipality of Dumalinao; Barangays Lintum, Singclot and Litan, all in the Municipality of Dinas; and Barangay Regla in the Municipality of San Pablo, all in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby separated from their respective municipalities and constituted into a distinct and independent Municipality of Guipos.
>
> **Section 2.** The technical description of the new municipality shall be as follows:
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | LINE | BEARING | DISTANCE |
> | 1–2 | 123º15’3"E–7º47’42"N | 5,350M |
> | 2–3 | 123º18’33"E–7º47’30"N | following the downstream course of the Dinas River until it reaches point 3 |
> | 3–4 | 123º20’26"E–7º45’59"N | 4,000M |
> | 4–5 | 123º22’36"E–7º42’30"N | 4,600M |
> | 5–6 | 123º22’36"E–7º42’30"N | following the downstream course of the Dinas River until it reaches point 6 |
> | 6–7 | 123º21’27"E–7º41’38"N | following the upstream course of the creek until it reaches point 7 |
> | 7–8 | 123º20’50"E–7º42’15"N | 2,200M |
> | 8–9 | 123º20’00"E–7º43’08"N | 2,200M |
> | 9–10 | 123º19’06"E–7º42’39"N | 1,840M |
> | 10–11 | 123º17’10"E–7º42’39"N | 3,550M |
> | 11–1 | 123º15’40"E–7º46’03"N | 3,000M. |
>
> **Section 3.** The seat of government of the new municipality shall be in Barangay Guipos.
>
> **Section 4.** After ratification by a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite to be conducted in the areas affected within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the approval of this Act, the mayor, vice-mayor and members of the sangguniang bayan of the new municipality shall be elected in the next regular election of local officials. The new municipality shall be considered duly organized upon the assumption of office of the first set of elected officials.
>
> **Section 5.** The Commission on Elections shall conduct and supervise the plebiscite. The expenses in holding the plebiscite shall be taken out of the Contingent Fund under the current fiscal year appropriations.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved: **October 7, 1991**.
>
>
>
