# Republic Act No. 7102

**AN ACT AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1431 BY RENAMING THE DON MARIANO MARCOS MEMORIAL POLYTECHNIC STATE COLLEGE TO MINDANAO POLYTECHNIC STATE COLLEGE**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7102
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1991/ra_7102_1991.html)

---

> **Eighth Congress**
>
>
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 7102             August 5, 1991**
>
> **AN ACT AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1431 BY RENAMING THE DON MARIANO MARCOS MEMORIAL POLYTECHNIC STATE COLLEGE TO MINDANAO POLYTECHNIC STATE COLLEGE**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The title of Presidential Decree No. 1431 which reads:
>
> "Presidential Decree No. 1431 Converting the Mindanao School of Arts and Trades in Cagayan de Oro City into Don Mariano Marcos Memorial Polytechnic State College of Northern Mindanao, Giving it Corporate Existence, Providing for a Board of Trustees and Defining its Powers, Duties and Responsibilities, Providing for Higher Vocational, Professional, and Technological Education and Appropriating Funds Thereforee"
>
> is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "Presidential Decree No. 1431 Converting the Mindanao School of Arts and Trades in Cagayan de Oro City into Mindanao Polytechnic State College, Giving Corporate Existence, Providing for a Board of Trustees and Defining its Powers, Duties and Responsibilities, Providing for Higher Vocational, Professional, and Technological Education and Appropriating Funds Thereforee."
>
> **Section 2.** All provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1431 referring to the name of Don Mariano Marcos Memorial Polytechnic State College shall be changed to Mindanao Polytechnic State College, and the said name shall mean to refer to the same college.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: .
>
>
>
> **Lapsed into law on August 5, 1991
> Without the signature of the President,
> In accordance with Article VI,
> Section 27 (1) of the Constitution**
>
>
>
