# Republic Act No. 7325

**AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE LOCAL ELECTIONS OF THE CITY OFFICIALS OF TRECE MARTIRES CITY, PROVINCE OF CAVITE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7325
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1992/ra_7325_1992.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7325, March 31, 1992 ]**
>
> AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE LOCAL ELECTIONS OF THE CITY OFFICIALS OF TRECE MARTIRES CITY, PROVINCE OF CAVITE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** *Elective Officials of the City Government of Trece Martires City, Province of Cavite.*- The following officials of the city government shall be elected at large by qualified voters of the city:
>
> a. The mayor;
>
> b. The vice-mayor;
>
> c. The regular members of the sangguniang panlungsod; and
>
> d. Such other officials as may be provided by law.
>
> **Section 2.** *Date of Election.*- Unless otherwise provided by law, the elections for the city officials shall be held simultaneously with the local elections in 1992.
>
> **Section 3.** *Transitory Provision.*- Pending election of the officials of the city government during the regular local elections, the mayor, vice-mayor, and the members of the sangguniang panlungsod shall be appointed by the provincial governor of the Province of Cavite.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 4.** *Repealing Clause*. - The provisions of Republic Act No. 981 which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.
>
> **Section 5.** *Effectivity Clause.*  - This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **NEPTALI A. GONZALES** *President of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **RAMON V. MITRA** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* |
> | This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 35098 and Senate Bill No. 1938 was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 5, 1992 and February 4, 1992, respectively. | |
> | (Sgd.) **ANACLETO D. BADOY, JR.** *Secretary of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** *Secretary General House of Representatives* |
>
> Approved: March 31, 1992
>
> (Sgd.) **CORAZON C. AQUINO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
