# Republic Act No. 7483

**AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE PRES. CARLOS P. GARCIA PROVINCIAL HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF TALIBON, PROVINCE OF BOHOL, FROM SEVENTY-FIVE (75) TO ONE HUNDRED (100) BEDS, AND RELOCATING THE SAID HOSPITAL IN SAN JOSE, TALIBON, BOHOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7483
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1992/ra_7483_1992.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7483, May 05, 1992 ]**
>
> AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE PRES. CARLOS P. GARCIA PROVINCIAL HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF TALIBON, PROVINCE OF BOHOL, FROM SEVENTY-FIVE (75) TO ONE HUNDRED (100) BEDS, AND RELOCATING THE SAID HOSPITAL IN SAN JOSE, TALIBON, BOHOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The bed capacity of the Pres. Carlos P. Garcia Provincial Hospital in the Municipality of Talibon, Province of Bohol, is hereby increased from seventy-five (75) to one hundred (100) beds, and relocating the said hospital in San Jose, Talibon, Bohol.LaW㏗iL
>
> **Section 2.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **NEPTALI A. GONZALES** *President of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **RAMON V. MITRA** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* |
> | This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 14, 1991 and February 3, 1992, respectively. | |
> | (Sgd.) **ANACLETO D. BADOY, JR.** *Secretary of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** *Secretary General House of Representatives* |
>
> Approved: May 05, 1992
>
> (Sgd.) **CORAZON C. AQUINO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
