# Republic Act No. 7265

**AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE LAGUNA PROVINCIAL HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. CRUZ, PROVINCE OF LAGUNA, FROM ONE HUNDRED FIFTY (150) TO TWO HUNDRED (200) BEDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7265
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1992/ra_7265_1992.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7265, March 20, 1992 ]**
>
> AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE LAGUNA PROVINCIAL HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. CRUZ, PROVINCE OF LAGUNA, FROM ONE HUNDRED FIFTY (150) TO TWO HUNDRED (200) BEDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The bed capacity of the Laguna Provincial Hospital in the Municipality of Sta. Cruz, Province of Laguna, is hereby increased from one hundred fifty (150) to two hundred (200) beds.
>
> **Section 2.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **NEPTALI A. GONZALES** *President of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **RAMON V. MITRA** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* |
> | This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 28, 1991 and December 10, 1991, respectively. | |
> | (Sgd.) **ANACLETO D. BADOY, JR.** *Secretary of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** *Secretary General House of Representatives* |
>
> Approved: March 20, 1992
>
> (Sgd.) **CORAZON C. AQUINO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
