# GR-128114

**PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, vs. ROGER CANDO Y PAGDANGANAN, ET AL.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, vs. ROGER CANDO Y PAGDANGANAN, ET AL.
- **Ponente**: Quisumbing, J.
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2000/oct2000/gr_128114_2000.html)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> **SUPREME COURT**
>
> EN BANC
>
> **G.R. No. 128114             October 25, 2000**
>
> PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, plaintiff-appellee,
>
> vs.
> **ROGER CANDO Y PAGDANGANAN, ARNEL VARGAS Y MAGTANGOB, AND WILBERTO RAPCING Y BROÑOLA,** accused-appellants.
>
> **QUISUMBING, *J*.:**
>
> On automatic review is the decision of the Regional Trial Court of Manila, Branch 33, in Criminal Case No. 95-142748, convicting appellants of the crime of robbery with homicide, sentencing them to death, ordering them solidarily to indemnify the heirs of the victim the amount of P50,000.00, and to return the personal belongings taken from the victim and other offended parties. In a related case, Criminal Case No. 95-142749, appellants were acquitted of the charge of carnapping.
>
> Appellants Cando and Rapcing, aged 40 and 28 respectively, were employed as candlemakers at the Rosarian Candle Factory located in Paco, Manila. Appellant Vargas, aged 20, was employed as a delivery boy. The victim, Luis D. Remoriata, was the caretaker ("*katiwala*") in said factory.
>
> The facts based on the records are as follows:
>
> In the afternoon of May 13, 1995, Vargas, Rapcing and one Nonoy Sayson were having a drinking session at a canteen in front of the factory. At around 9:30 P.M., Cando joined the group. Upon the prompting of Vargas, Cando went to the factory to get his salary. Cando came back angry because he was unable to get his salary from the secretary, nor was he able to get a loan of P100.00 from the caretaker. Apparently, Cando already had previous misunderstandings with the caretaker, so this time, he threatened to kill the caretaker. The group continued their drinking session.1
>
> At around 11:00 P.M., Vargas, Rapcing, and Cando, armed with two knives and carrying a shoulder bag, climbed the fence of the factory. They walked on the galvanized iron roof towards the other building. One by one, they slipped through a narrow window at the side of the building. The trio proceeded to the victim's room, which was lighted by a fluorescent lamp. Cando picked a piece of lead pipe and told Vargas to pull open the door where the victim's mosquito net was attached. When Vargas pulled open the door, the mosquito net snapped and Cando struck the victim on the head with the lead pipe. The victim awakened and Cando demanded money from him. When the victim replied that he had no money, Cando struck him again with the lead pipe. Blood oozed from the victim's head. Cando asked the victim if he recognized him. The victim weakly replied "Yes, You are Roger (Cando)." Thereafter, Cando repeatedly hit him with the lead pipe until he became unconscious. Cando placed the victim's radio cassette in his bag. He went upstairs to get more items and the keys of the Cimarron van. Thereafter, the trio went downstairs to where the van was parked. Vargas, the only one who knew how to drive, sat on the driver's seat. Cando and Rapcing opened the gate, then pushed the van outside. Once they were out of hearing range, Vargas gunned the motor and the two clambered into the van. Cando sat on the passenger side while Rapcing sat at the back. Cando prevailed upon the group to proceed to Quiapo to visit his girlfriend, but they could not locate her so they just drove around until daybreak. When they reached Hemady Street in Quezon City, they abandoned the van. The trio boarded a jeep going to Taft Avenue and went their separate ways.2  It was then already early morning of May 14, 1995.
>
> At around 6:00 A.M., Mrs. Norma Chu, the factory owner, discovered the dead body of Luis Remoriata. The factory van was also missing. A hysterical Mrs. Chu called the Barangay Captain, who in turn reported the incident to the police. Upon investigation, the police found a bakawan firewood stained with blood some ten meters away from the victim's body. The police also called a funeral parlor to get the body of the victim.3
>
> In the meantime, the van was discovered by *Barangay Kagawad* Mejia, who called up the telephone number posted at the side of the van. The owner, Mrs. Chu, arrived with three NBI Agents who took pictures of the van and lifted fingerprints from it.4
>
> The very next day, May 15, 1995, Mrs. Chu lodged a complaint5  with the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI). Based on her complaint, the NBI dispatched a team of agents to the crime scene. The NBI recovered a bloodstained steel pipe behind the door of the room. Upon learning from Mrs. Chu that appellants Cando and Vargas had previous skirmishes with the victim, on May 16, 1995, the NBI agents picked up Vargas from the factory and brought him to their office for questioning.6
>
> Vargas readily admitted his participation and pinpointed appellants Cando and Rapcing as his co-perpetrators. He likewise executed an extrajudicial admission7  and waiver of his rights under Articles 124 and 125 of the Revised Penal Code.8
>
> Acting on the lead, the NBI agents picked appellant Cando at his house in Libis St., Caloocan City. Appellant Cando invoked his right to remain silent.9  He executed a waiver of rights under Articles 124 and 125 of the Revised Penal Code.10
>
> Thereafter, appellant Rapcing was also arrested at his house in Cristobal St., Looban, Paco, Manila.11  Rapcing admitted complicity in the crime, and executed an extrajudicial admission12  corroborating the story of Vargas. He also executed a waiver of his rights under Articles 124 and 125 of the Revised Penal Code.13
>
> During custodial investigation, the three were assisted by Atty. Isidro T. Gamutan, a lawyer who happened to be at the NBI because he was following up a case.
>
> On May 17, 1995, appellant Vargas executed a second extrajudicial admission14  stating that Cando gave him the bag containing the stolen items for safekeeping and that he brought the bag to his sister-in-law's house in Kahilum, San Andres Bukid, Manila. He accompanied the NBI agents to the house and gave them the bag which bore Cando's name.15
>
> On May 23, 1995, appellants were charged with the crime of Robbery with Homicide under the following Information:16
>
> "The undersigned accuses ROGER CANDO y PAGDANGANAN, ARNEL VARGAS y MAGTANGOB and WILFREDO RAPCING y BROÑOLA of the crime of Robbery with Homicide, committed as follows;
>
> That on or about May 13, 1995, in the City of Manila, Philippines, the said accused conspiring and confederating together and helping one another, did then and there wilfully, unlawfully and feloniously, with intent of gain and by means of force, violence and intimidation, to wit: by hitting one LUIS D. REMORIATA with steel pipe and wood on the head several times and at the same time forcibly taking away from him the following, to wit:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | One (1) Brown wallet valued at | P 120.00 |
> | containing cash money of | 1,000.00 |
> | Cash money in the amount of | 10,000.00 |
> | Three (3) wrist watches, all valued | 1,000.00 |
> | One (1) Radio cassette (STD) | 1,200.00 |
> | Assorted clothing, not less than | 500.00 |
