# MC 2025-12 | FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR COOPERATIVES ENGAGED IN LENDING THRU ENHANCED PESOS

## Metadata
- **MC Number**: MC-2025-12
- **Year**: 2025
- **Source**: [https://cda.gov.ph/memorandum-circulars/mc-2025-10-financial-performance-standards-for-cooperatives-engaged-in-lending-thru-enhanced-pesos/](https://cda.gov.ph/memorandum-circulars/mc-2025-10-financial-performance-standards-for-cooperatives-engaged-in-lending-thru-enhanced-pesos/)
- **PDF URL**: [https://cda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/MC-2025-12-NPO1-merged.pdf](https://cda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/MC-2025-12-NPO1-merged.pdf)

---

--- PAGE 1 ---

POR
/ 2025
COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 2 -
827 Aurora Blvd, Service Road, Brgy. immaculate Concepcion, Cuba, 1111 Quezon City, Philippines intereaitional Vea
eibbns mameAd B cda.gov. ph 62 helpdesk@cda gov ph rf) AENREPRINT I N G Of | °f agg |
oP" RECEIVED BY, 5 oo

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. _ 2025-12
Series of 2025

ENGAGED IN LENDING THRU ENHANCED PESOS

Pursuant to Section 4(a) and (f) of Republic Act No. 11364, otherwise known as the
Cooperative Development Authority Charter of 2019, the following Guidelines is hereby issued
to prescribe the use of the Enhance PESOS as financial performance standards for
Cooperatives after a series of workshops, consultations with cooperative sector and other
concerned agencies.

Section 1. Title: This Guidelines shall be known as the “Financial Performance
Standards for Cooperatives Engaged in Lending thru Enhanced PESOS”.

Section 2. Coverage. This Guidelines shall govern and cover all registered Credit
Cooperatives and Multipurpose Cooperatives whose main business is lending.

Section 3. Definition of Terms

AVERAGE MEMBERS’ SHARE =~ refers to the average of the amount of capital that
members have contributed to the cooperative between two periods.

AVERAGE TOTAL LOANS OUTSTANDING = refers to the average of the amount of
outstanding loans to members over a specific period of time.

LOANS RESTRUCTURED - refer to loans where the original terms have been
modified to make repayment easier for the borrower. This can include changes such
as extended loan terms, lower interest rates, partial or full condonation of interest and
penalties, or modified installment amounts.

MAIN BUSINESS -— refers to the business with the highest percentage in terms of
volume of business.

NON-EARNING ASSETS - are assets that do not give direct revenues to the
cooperative, I, e. , Cash on Hand, Cash in Bank which are non-interest bearing,
Accounts Receivable, Assets in -Liquidation, Fixed Assets (Land, Building, Equipment,
etc.), Prepaid Expenses and other deferrals, and problem assets.

ENHANCED PESOS - refers to a set of indicators and standards that measures the
financial performance of cooperatives engaged in lending.

PORTFOLIO AT RISK (PAR 30) — is the outstanding principal balance of all loans
with one or more amortization past due for over 30 days.

Office of the Chairman: (02) 8721-5325 / (02) 8721-5324 f A) gman"
tofisfor- Office of the Administrator; (02) 8721-0633 . en
™ Officer of the day: (02) 8725-3764 ;

TUVRheenianed

wee bee coer
© weagryraa


--- PAGE 2 ---

PROBLEM ASSETS -— refers to a resource or financial claim whose value has significantly
decreased or become unlikely to be recovered often due to non-payment, damage or a lack of
market.

Section 4. Purpose of the Enhanced PESOS. The purpose of these standards is to
serve aS a management tool for the cooperative, enabling the identification of
operational problem areas, the determination of areas for improvement, and the
assessment of the cooperative's overall health.

This will also serve as supervisory tool for the Authority to evaluate the performance of
cooperatives engaged in lending. Results of the evaluation and assessment of the
cooperative's performance against certain standards will allow the Authority and the
designated supervisor/regulator to compare the performance of various cooperatives
over time and across peers.

Section 5. Indicators of Enhanced PESOS

This component is comprised of indicators and standards that look at the financial
performance of the cooperatives engaged in lending. It has the following major
components:

A. Portfolio Quality (P) - The ratios/indicators under this group provides the
cooperatives appropriate tools in monitoring the quality of the loan. This should be
monitored closely inasmuch as the loan portfolio accounts constitute the bulk of the
cooperative's assets. It is also important that assets are adequately protected.
Protection is measured by comparing the adequacy of the provisions for loan losses
against the amount of delinquent loans. The status of the health of the portfolio of the
cooperative will either propel the cooperative to grow more or imperil the whole
sustainability program of the cooperative.

B. Efficiency (E) — The ratios under this group focus on the operation and
administrative efficiency on the delivery of financial services, i.e., loans and savings
products to its members. Indicators under this component determine the ability of the
cooperative to generate sufficient income to cover expenses on operations.

C. Stability (S) - The stability of the cooperative is important to ensure that financial
services are delivered to its members in a sustained manner. Important of this
component is the increase of the institutional capital of the cooperative instead of
purely relying on the share capital of members. It is also important for the cooperative
to maintain sufficient liquidity to meet the financial needs of its members. It means the

2| Page


--- PAGE 3 ---

cooperative can effectively manage risks, meet its obligations, and sustain operations
under varying economic conditions. Stability is essential for building member
confidence, ensuring liquidity, earning adequate returns, and supporting long-term
growth.

D. Operation (O) - The indicators under this group emphasize the effectiveness of the
cooperative to generate income on its operations and return to members. These are
key metrics used to evaluate the efficiency, effectiveness, and overall performance of
cooperative financial institutions. These indicators help track financial health, member
service, and operational sustainability.

E. Structure of Assets (S) - This component will help ascertain the quality and the
structure of the assets of the cooperative. The indicators and standards determine the
extent of the share of the cooperative’s various assets to its total assets and assess
the effective use of these assets to generate revenues.

Using the audited financial statements that adopt the standard chart of account for
cooperatives, the Enhanced PESOS indicators will be computed. The formula and
standards for each of the above indicators are presented in Annex A of this Guidelines.

Section 6. Overall Rating System

After getting ail the points under each component, an overall rating will be obtained,
accompanied by an adjectival rating as follows:

Rating atv

Rating 1. Very Satisfactory. The cooperative has strong performance that
consistently provides safe and sound operations. Cooperatives in this group comply
with cooperative rules and regulations and are resistant. to external shocks and
financial disturbances. They are also able to withstand unexpected adverse changes
in business environment.

3 | Page


--- PAGE 4 ---

Rating 2. Satisfactory. The cooperative shows satisfactory performance that
consistently provides safe and sound operations. Cooperatives in this group are able
to withstand business fluctuations well. However, there are some areas of concern
that require important attention which if unchecked, can potentially develop into
conditions of greater concern. Supervisory response is limited to minor adjustments to
ensure that operations continue to be satisfactory and sustainable. -

Rating 3. Fair. The cooperative’s performance is flawed to some degree and is a
supervisory concern. Results of key performance measures indicate that safe and
sound operations may be adversely affected. Cooperatives in this group are only
nominally resistant to adverse business conditions and may deteriorate if identifiable
areas of weakness are not corrected immediately

Rating 4. Needs Improvement. The cooperative is falling short in meeting key
performance standards and member expectations. This may include issues such as
weak financial management, low loan repayment rates, poor internal controls, limited
member engagement. While the cooperative remains operational, critical
improvements are needed to ensure financial health. Strategic planning, capacity-
building, and stronger oversight are essential to address these deficiencies and regain
member confidence. This group requires very close supervisory attention.

Rating 5. Poor. The cooperative exhibits unsatisfactory performance and is in critical
condition, requiring immediate and comprehensive remedial action. Key indicators
reflect severe weaknesses in financial stability and operations. Cooperatives in this
category face a very high risk of failure and are unlikely to recover without substantial
intervention.

Section 7. Reporting of Enhanced PESOS Rating

The Enhanced PESOS rating shall be incorporated in the Audited Financial Statement
as part of the Notes to the Financial Statement.

4 | Page


--- PAGE 5 ---

Section 8. Regulatory Measures and Enforcement Actions

Description / Nature of | Enforcement/ Regulatory Action
Violation / Non-Compliance

Failure to attain a “Fair” Rating on | 3rd Year - Requirement to Submit a
Enhanced PESOS Corrective Action Plan (CAP)

Sth Year - Warning

7th Year - Merger/ Consolidation or
Revocation of Certificate of
Registration

Section 8. Repealing Clause

All circulars, regulations, issuances or parts thereof, inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this Circular are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following the
completion of its publication in the Official Gazette and the Office of National
Administrative Register (ONAR).

Approved per Board Resolution No. 544, Series of 2025 dated September 10,
20285.

Issued this 25th day of September 2025

For the Board of Directors:

USEC ALEXANDER B. RA P
Chairman

5 | Page


--- PAGE 6 ---

FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (PESOS
INDICATORS

FORMULA

PORTFOLIO QUALITY

PORTFOLIO AT RISK

Measures the risk of default in the portfolio or the rate of
uncollectible accounts

PORTFOLIO AT RISK - DOSRI LOANS

Measures the risk of default in the portfolio or the rate of
uncollectible accounts of the Officers and Related
Interest up to the 2nd degree of consanguinity or affinity.

Adequacy of Provisioning of APLL (over 12 months past
due)

Measures the adequacy of the allowance for expected
losses on /oans for aver 72months past due

Adequacy of Provisioning for over 30 days to 1 year
past due

Measures the adequacy of the allowance for expected
losses on loans for 31 to 180 days past due

Balance of loans for over 30 days missed payment
Total Gross Loans Oustanding

ANNEX A

STANDARD POINT

Total
Pts.

5% or less
> 5% to 10%
> 10% to 15%
> 15% to 20%
> 20% ta 25%
> 25%

10

Balance of DOSRI Loans for over 30 days missed
payment
Total DOSRI LOANS Outstanding

APLL for over 12 months
Total Past Due Loans over 12 months + Restructured
Loans

(note: not included those with 6 consecutive paid
amortization

Total amount of allowance - Required Amount
of Allowance for Loans over 12 months past due
Total Past Due Loans from over 30 days to 1 year +
Restructured Loans

EFFICIENCY
1 | Asset Yield

Measures the ability of the coop's assets ta generate
income.

2 | Administrative Efficiency

Measures the cost of efficiently managing the
cooperalive's assets

+——

Net Surplus*
Average Total Assets

*Net Surplus refers to net of required provisioning
shall get 0

Average Total Assets

3 _|Loan Portfolio Profitability

Measures how profitable the loan portfolio is

4 Cost per Peso Loan

Measures the efficiency in managing the cooperative's
loan portfolio.

STABILITY

Liquidity

obligations as it falls due

Liquid Assets - Short Term Payable
Measures the cooperative's ability to meet its short term Total Deposits |

Income from Loans +Service Fees, Filing Fees +
Fines, Penalties, Surcharges
Ave. Total Loans Oustanding

Financing Costs +( Admin. Costs-Members Benefit

Expense-Social Service Expense)
Average Total Loans Outstanding

0%
1% and more

100%
80% to < 100%
60% to < 80%

35% ta < 60%
10% to < 35%

< 10%

35% 5 5
25% to< 35% 4
2
2
<5% 0 |
At least inflation rate 5 5
1 to 2 percentage points below
inflation rate 4
3 to 4 percentage points below
inflation rate 3
More than 4 percentage points
below inflation rate 4
0 or negative asset yield 0
5
7% and below 5
Above 7% - 10% 3
above 10% - 15% 1
over 15% 0
20% and above 4 4
15% to < 20% 3
10% to < 15% 2
5% to< 10% 1
< 5% or negative 0
0.10 and below 3 3
> 0.10 to 0.15 2
> 0.15 ta 0.20 1
Above 0.20 i)
15% to 20% 10
12% to< 15% 21% to 30% 8 10
9% ta < 12%31%-40% 6
6% to < 9% 41% -50% 4
. 1% to< 6% 2
Below 1%above 50% 0



--- PAGE 7 ---

2 |Solvency
Measures the degree of protection that the cooperative (Total Assets + Allowance for Probable Losses on 410% and above 10 10
has for members savings and share capital contribution Loans) — (Total Liabilities - Deposits + Past Due 100% ta < 110% 8
in the event of liquidation of the cooperative's assets and Loans + Loans Restructured + Loans Under
liabilities. Litigation+impaired Assets 90% to < 100% 6
Deposit liabilities + Share capital + Deposit for Share 80% to < 90% 4
Capital Subscription 70% to < 80% 2
below 70% 0
Impaired assets = net of impairment losses
Past Due Loans = 31 days and above
3 | Net Institutional Capital
Measures the level of institutional capital to absorb (ReservestAliow) -(Past Due + Loans in Litigation + 10% and above 10 10
potential losses impaired Assets 7% to < 10% B
Total Assets 5% to< 7% 6
3% ta< 5% 4
1% to < 3% 2
Below 1% 0
past due = 31 days above
QO |OPERATIONS
1 Return on Member's share
Measures the earning capacity of member's share Interest on Share Capital Higher than inflation rate 4 4
capital Total Average Share Month equal to inflation rate 2
below inflation rate 0
2 | Operational Self Sufficiency
*Meesures the ability of the cooperatives to sustain its Income from Loans +Service Fees+ Filing Fees+ 120% and above 4 a
operations, Fines, Penalties and Surcharges 110% to < 120% 3
Financing Cosis + Admin. Costs 100% to < 110% 2
400% 1
< 100% | 0
S |STRUCTURE OF ASSETS
1 _|Non-Earning Asset Ratio
5% and below 5 5
*Measures the percentage of total assets that are not Non-earning Assets > 6% to 8% 4
praducing incame. Total Assets > 8% to 10% 3
> 10% to 12% 2
> 12% 1

2 Extent of Assets financed by Deposit Liabilities (Asset
Structure - Deposits)

Measures the percentage of total assets financed by Total Deposit Liabilities

members' deposits Total Assets

3 |Asset Structure Loans
«Measures the percentage of total assets invested in
the loan portfolio.
Loans Receivable
Total Assets
4 | Asset Structure - Share Capital

«Measures the percentage of liquid assets over total
assels

Total Assets

TOTAL POINTS

> 55% to 80%
> 45% to 55%
> 35% to 45%
35% & below above 80%

oj-Ww an

> 70% to 80% 5
> 60% to 70% > 80% to 85% 4
> 50% to 60% > 85% to 90% 3
2
0

> 40% to 50% > 90% to 95%
40% and below Above 95%

> 20% to 45%

> 10% to >20%
below 10% over 45%
