# Republic Act No. 7752

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY VISTA ALEGRE, CITY OF BACOLOD, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE TEOFILO GENSOLI, SR. MEMORIAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7752
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1994/ra_7752_1994.html)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> Congress of the Philippines
> Second Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7752, June 19, 1994 ]**
>
> AN ACT ESTABLISHING A HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY VISTA ALEGRE, CITY OF BACOLOD, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE TEOFILO GENSOLI, SR. MEMORIAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established, under the supervision of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, a high school in Barangay Vista Alegre, City of Bacolod, Province of Negros Occidental, to be known as the Teofilo Gensoli, Sr. Memorial High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports shall implement this Act so as to make the Teofilo Gensoli, Sr. Memorial High School operational in the first school term after the effectivity of this Act.
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be funded out of the appropriations authorized by Republic Act No. 7663 for the Department of Education, Culture and Sports intended for the operational expenses of newly legislated high schools. Thereafter, the amount needed for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, Lapsed into law on June 19, 1994 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
>
>
