# Republic Act No. 7516

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE DELFIN ALBANO MEMORIAL SCHOOL OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN MARIANO, PROVINCE OF ISABELA, INTO AN INSTITUTE TO BE KNOWN AS THE DELFIN ALBANO MEMORIAL INSTITUTE OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY, AMENDING BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 339, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7516
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1992/ra_7516_1992.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7516, May 21, 1992 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE DELFIN ALBANO MEMORIAL SCHOOL OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN MARIANO, PROVINCE OF ISABELA, INTO AN INSTITUTE TO BE KNOWN AS THE DELFIN ALBANO MEMORIAL INSTITUTE OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY, AMENDING BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 339, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 1 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 339 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> **Section 1.** The San Mariano Junior National Agricultural High School in the Municipality of San Mariano, Province of Isabela, is hereby converted into an institute which shall hereafter be known as the Delfin Albano Memorial Institute of Agriculture and Technology."
>
> **Section 2.** A new section is hereby inserted between Section 1 and Section 2 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 339 to read as follows:
>
> **Section 2.** The Institute, in addition to technical and vocational education, shall provide and offer baccalaureate courses leading to the degrees of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture, Bachelor of Science in Fishery, Bachelor of Science in Veterinary Medicine and other related sciences and short-term courses geared to the skilled manpower needs intended for the out-of-school youths."
>
> **Section 3.** Section 2 and Section 3 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 339 are hereby renumbered as Section 3 and Section 4, respectively.
>
> **Section 4.** All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Delfin Albano Memorial School of Agriculture and Technology are hereby transferred to/absorbed by the Delfin Albano Memorial Institute of Agriculture and Technology.
>
> **Section 5.** In addition to the current appropriations of the Delfin Albano Memorial School of Agriculture and Technology, the amount needed to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **NEPTALI A. GONZALES** *President of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **RAMON V. MITRA** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* |
> | This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 17, 1991 and January 27, 1992, respectively. | |
> | **ANACLETO D. BADOY, JR.** *Secretary of the Senate* | **CAMILO L. SABIO** *Secretary General House of Representatives* |
>
> Approved: May 21, 1992
>
> (Sgd.) **CORAZON C. AQUINO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
