# Republic Act No. 7628

**AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE STA. CRUZ MEDICARE COMMUNITY HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. CRUZ, PROVINCE OF ZAMBALES, FROM FIFTEEN (15) TO TWENTY-FIVE (25) BEDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7628
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1992/ra_7628_1992.html)

---

> Fifth Regular Session
>
> Begun and hold in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7628, July 17, 1992 ]**
>
> AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE STA. CRUZ MEDICARE COMMUNITY HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. CRUZ, PROVINCE OF ZAMBALES, FROM FIFTEEN (15) TO TWENTY-FIVE (25) BEDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The bed capacity of the Sta. Cruz Medicare Community Hospital in the Municipality of Sta. Cruz, Province of Zambales, is hereby increased from fifteen (15) to twenty-five (25) beds.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **NEPTALI A. GONZALES** *President of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **RAMON V. MITRA** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* |
> | This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 3, 1992 and January 23, 1992, respectively. | |
> | (Sgd.) **ANACLETO D. BADOY, JR.** *Secretary of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** *Secretary General House of Representatives* |
>
> Approved: July 17, 1992
>
> (Sgd.) **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
