# Republic Act No. 7787

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE LEMERY NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF LEMERY, PROVINCE OF ILOILO, INTO A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE LEMERY POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7787
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1994/ra_7787_1994.html)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> Congress of the Philippines
> Second Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7787, August 08, 1994 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE LEMERY NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF LEMERY, PROVINCE OF ILOILO, INTO A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE LEMERY POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Lemery National High School in the Municipality of Lemery, Province of Iloilo, is hereby converted into a polytechnic college, to be known as the Lemery Polytechnic College.
>
> **Section 2.** The faculty and employees of the Lemery National High School, as well as its funds, assets, equipment and facilities, shall be absorbed by the College.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports is hereby directed to take such steps as are necessary for the immediate conversion and operation of the College.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Lemery National High School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on August 8, 1994 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
