# Republic Act No. 7995

**AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE CONVERSION OF THE BAROTAC NUEVO NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAROTAC NUEVO, PROVINCE OF ILOILO, INTO A POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE TO BE KNOWN AS THE BAROTAC NUEVO POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7995
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_7995_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 7995, April 22, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE CONVERSION OF THE BAROTAC NUEVO NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAROTAC NUEVO, PROVINCE OF ILOILO, INTO A POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE TO BE KNOWN AS THE BAROTAC NUEVO POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Barotac Nuevo National High School in the Municipality of Barotac Nuevo, Province of Iloilo, is hereby converted into a polytechnic institute to be known as the Barotac Nuevo Polytechnic Institute.
>
> **Section 2.** The school, in addition to its present secondary offerings, is hereby authorized to offer post secondary programs in agriculture, technology and engineering and teacher education, which are priority programs of the government schools as well as short-term technical and vocational courses, subject to the policies of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The title to the assets and properties now under the name of Barotac Nuevo Comprehensive High School shall be changed to the Barotac Nuevo Polytechnic Institute, in accordance with existing laws, rules and regulations.
>
> **Section 4.** The faculty and employees of the Barotac Nuevo Comprehensive High School shall remain as such faculty and employees of the Institute: *Provided, however,* That those who may opt to retire shall be granted such benefits and privileges as may be provided by existing laws.
>
> **Section 5.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports is hereby authorized to promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement the conversion and operation of the Institute subject to existing rules and regulations.
>
> **Section 6.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriation of the Barotac Nuevo National Comprehensive High School.
>
> Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 7.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on April 22, 1995 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
