# Republic Act No. 7760

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE NANAGUN MUNICIPAL HIGH SCHOOL INTO NANAGUN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY NANAGUN, MUNICIPALITY OF LUMBAYANAGUE, PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7760
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1994/ra_7760_1994.html)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> Congress of the Philippines
> Second Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7760, June 19, 1994 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE NANAGUN MUNICIPAL HIGH SCHOOL INTO NANAGUN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY NANAGUN, MUNICIPALITY OF LUMBAYANAGUE, PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be an established national high school in Barangay Nanagun, Municipality of Lumbayanague, Province of Lanao del Sur, by converting the Nanagun Municipal High School into Nanagun National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports is hereby directed to take the necessary steps for the immediate conversion, operation and maintenance of the school herein provided.
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be funded out of the appropriations authorized by Republic Act No. 7663 for the Department of Education, Culture and Sports intended for the operational expenses of newly legislated high schools. Thereafter, the amount needed for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on June 19, 1994 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
