# Republic Act No. 7934

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE VICTORINO SALCEDO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SARA, PROVINCE OF ILOILO, INTO A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE VICTORINO SALCEDO POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 7934
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_7934_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 7934, March 01, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE VICTORINO SALCEDO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SARA, PROVINCE OF ILOILO, INTO A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE VICTORINO SALCEDO POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Victorino Salcedo National High School in the Municipality of Sara, Province of Iloilo, is hereby converted into a polytechnic college, to be known as the Victorino Salcedo Polytechnic College.
>
> **Section 2.** The faculty and employees of the Victorino Salcedo National High School, as well as its funds, assets, equipment and facilities, shall be absorbed by the College.
>
> **Section 3.** The Chairperson of the Commission on Higher Education is hereby directed to take such steps as are necessary for the immediate conversion and operation of the College.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Victorino Salcedo National High School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO J. ANGARA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 16, 1995 and February 15, 1995, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: March 1, 1995
>
> (Sgd.) **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
