# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 30

**RATIONALIZING THE INCREASE FOR ANTI-HIJACKING AND ANTI-TERRORISM COMPONENT (NACAHT SHARE-ASF) FROM THE TERMINAL FEES COLLECTED PURSUANT TO LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 414-A AND EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 69**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 30
- **Date**: September 30, 1998
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1998/eo_30_1998.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 30, September 30, 1998 ]
>
> RATIONALIZING THE INCREASE FOR ANTI-HIJACKING AND ANTI-TERRORISM COMPONENT (NACAHT SHARE-ASF) FROM THE TERMINAL FEES COLLECTED PURSUANT TO LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 414-A AND EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 69
>
> WHEREAS, in order to improve efficiency of the National Action Committee on Anti-Hijacking and Anti-Terrorism (NACAHT), to secure adequate measures aimed at handling all incidents of hijacking and all other offensive and terroristic activities, and to ensure the safe and continuous operation of the civil aviation and airline industry operations, sufficient operational and logistical funds thereto must be provided through an increase in the aviation security fee on departing international and domestic passengers;
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need for increased vigilance and airport security, thus to operationalize its mandate, NACAHT must upgrade its manpower skills, revitalize its technical capability and modernize its logistical resources and special weapons system;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Anti-Hijacking and Anti-Terrorism component was not proportionately increased when the terminal fee was increased to P 500.00;
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to restore the original intended percentage for NACAHT to ensure its readiness in every given situation;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I,** **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** The Anti-Hijacking and Anti-Terrorism share being collected from every departing international passenger under Executive Order No. 69 dated 21 November 1986, is hereby increased from THIRTY PESOS (P 30.00) to SIXTY PESOS (P 60.00).
>
> **Section 2.** The Anti-Hijacking and Anti-Terrorism share being collected from every departing domestic passenger under LOI No. 414-A, 17 June 1976, is hereby increased from THREE PESOS (P 3.00) to FIFTEEN PESOS (P 15.00)
>
> **Section 3.** All laws, orders, issuances and rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> **Done** in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September, in the year if our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> Adopted: 30 Sept. 1998
>
> (SGD.) **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**
> President
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **RONALDO B. ZAMORA**
> 0
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
