# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 36

**AMENDING THE FIRST SENTENCE OF SECTION 2.3 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 29, MANDATING THE STREAMLINING OF THE NATIONAL TOBACCO ADMINISTRATION**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 36
- **Date**: October 27, 1998
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1998/eo_36_1998.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 36, October 27, 1998 ]
>
> AMENDING THE FIRST SENTENCE OF SECTION 2.3 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 29, MANDATING THE STREAMLINING OF THE NATIONAL TOBACCO ADMINISTRATION
>
> WHEREAS, given the scope of the mandate of the National Tobacco Administration (NTA) and its responsibilites;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the NTA is the sole government agency which is tasked to oversee and promote the tobacco industry in the Philippines;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the first mandate of the NTA, under its Charter, is "to improve the economic and living conditions and raise the quality of life of the tobacco farmers, including those who depend on the industry for their LIVELIHOOD";
>
> **WHEREAS,** the NTA is tasked to pursue aggressively and relentlessly its mandate;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the NTA needs all the expertise and supervision of knowledgeable and competent field workers to teach/guide the tobacco farmers in the proper implementation of the prescribed tobacco technology for quality production.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Section 2.3. if Executive Order No. 29, to read, as follows:
>
> **Section 1.** The number of positions in the new staffing pattern shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750). However, the revised organizational structure and staffing shall be subject to approval by the DBM. In the vent that the Agency fails to submit its proposal for the revised Organization Structure and Staffing Pattern (OSSP), the DBM shall issue the final OSSP for immediate implementation by the NTA, one (1) month after the issuance of this Executive Order.
>
> **Section 2.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect one (1) day after its publication in a newspaper of national circulation.
>
> **Done** in the City of Manila this 27th day of October, 1998.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> (SGD.) **JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA**
> President
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **RONALDO B. ZAMORA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
