# BTA Parliament Bill No. 29

**AN ACT CREATING THE BANGSAMORO PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (BPDA) IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

---

**Parliament:** BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 1
**Bill Number:** 29
**Status:** Archived
**As of:** 

**Principal Author(s):** EBRAHIM, AHOD BALAWAG

## Legislative History

FILED
OCTOBER 24, 2019
FIRST READING
REFERRED TO COMMITTEE ON RULES
SESSION NO. 22
OCTOBER 25, 2019
SECOND READING
REFERRED TO COMMITTEE ON RULES, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT, AND COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
SPECIAL SESSION NO. 03
DECEMBER 11, 2019
COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 13:
BILL 37 (CONSOLIDATED BILL NO.  16, 29, AND 30)
ARCHIVED

## Documents

- [Filed Copy (PDF)](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Bill-No.-29.pdf)

---

*Source: [https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills/an-act-creating-the-bangsamoro-planning-and-development-authority-bpda-in-the-bangsamoro-autonomous-region-in-muslim-mindanao-and-appropriating-funds-therefor/](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills/an-act-creating-the-bangsamoro-planning-and-development-authority-bpda-in-the-bangsamoro-autonomous-region-in-muslim-mindanao-and-appropriating-funds-therefor/)*

## Full Text

============================================================
PAGE 1
============================================================
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Cotabato City

BTA Cabinet Bill No. 2a

Introduced by : The Government of the Day

a I I——I——iIiIiI_i«—WNdé—~O

AN ACT CREATING THE BANGSAMORO PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (BPDA) IN THE BANGSAMORO
AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

SECTION 1. Name — This Act shall be known as the “Development Planning,
Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation Act of 2019”.

SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy — The Bangsamoro Government shall adopt
and implement continuing integrated and coordinated long, medium, and short term
development plans and policies towards sustainable development of the Bangsamoro.

It is recognized that the formulation of socio-economic policies and plans is a
vital process that calls for the participation of the government line agencies, private sector
and other stakeholders at the regional level.

The formulation and adoption of these policies and plans need to be coordinated
by a strong planning and development agency to ensure the consistency of policies, plans
and programs for the sustainable use of the region’s resources. To this end, the
Parliament shall create an independent socio-economic and planning agency.

SECTION 3. Creation of the Bangsamoro Planning and Development
Authority- Pursuant to the above mentioned policies, the Bangsamoro Planning and
Development Authority (BPDA) is hereby created to serve as the socio-economic
development planning and policy coordinating agency of the Bangsamoro Government. It
shall serve as the Technical Secretariat of the Bangsamoro Economic and Development
Council (BEDC) and the regional counterpart of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA) in the BARMM.

The BPDA shall generate and provide impartial, objective and evidenced-based
analyses and recommendations for the socio-economic advancement of the BARMM.

SECTION 4. Functions and Responsibilities of the BPDA — The BPDA shall
have the following functions and responsibilities:

1. Coordinate and facilitate the formulation, implementation and monitoring and
evaluation of the socio-economic development plans, policies, programs and
projects of the BARMM;


============================================================
PAGE 2
============================================================
Oo OnNA UN PWN KE

22

Review, evaluate and recommend short, medium and long-term development
plans, and proposed programs and projects for consideration by the BEDC;
Coordinate the annual and multi-year investment programming of the BARMM
ministries, line agencies and offices;

Provide technical assistance to the implementing ministries, line agencies and
offices, Local Government Units and other development partners in the BARMM
in identifying and developing plans, programs and projects;

Assist the Local Government Units in the BARMM on planning, investment
programming and other activities in support to local development,

Coordinate all regional, national and foreign assisted programs and projects in the
BARMM;

Conduct researches, statistical, and knowledge management and communication
related activities in support to planning, policy formulation, project development
and monitoring and evaluation;

Monitor and evaluate the implementation of programs and projects in the
BARMM;

Serve as the Technical Secretariat of the BEDC;

Perform such other appropriate tasks as may be assigned by the BEDC or other

competent authorities.

SECTION 6. Organizational Structure - The BPDA shall be headed by a

Director General to be assisted by Deputy Director General and three Bureau Directors.

The BPDA shall be composed of the following bureaus, services and divisions:

1. Planning and Policies Bureau (PPB) - The PPB shall coordinate and
facilitate the formulation of development policies and plans, investment
program, guidelines and priorities of the BARMM. It shall lead the
assessment, monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of plans,
programs and projects in the BARMM. It shall ensure a strong and efficient
linkage between development planning, programming and budgeting.

The PPB shall consist of the following divisions:

Macro-economic Planning Division
Economic Planning Division
Infrastructure Planning Division
Social Planning Division
Monitoring and Evaluation Division

g9aoo8

2. Research Development and Special Projects Bureau (RDSPB)- The
RDSPB shall lead the preparation of relevant studies, researches and accurate
statistical data of the BARMM for timely and evidence-based planning,
project development and research agenda of the Bangsamoro Government.

The bureau will also coordinate activities related to the review and evaluation
of projects intended for Official Development Assistance (ODA) and national
government assistance for the socio-economic development of the BARMM.

The RDSPB shall consist of the following divisions:

a. Research and Development, and Information Technology Division
(RDITD)

b. Official Development Assistance/Nationally Funded Programs and
Projects Coordination Assistance Division (ODA/NFPPCAD) and


============================================================
PAGE 3
============================================================
Oo ON HD MT FWY PF

aun niununspA DA BBB BR DP PDP BRWWWWWWWWWWnNNNNNNNNNN PPR RPP RP RRR
PASE HBPSSESRABPSESESSSSRRRSSRESESSRARTRDESOHRESSLSE SBA BPO

c. Local Planning and Development Assistance Division (LPDAD)

3. Finance and Administrative Support Services (FASS) - The FASS shall
provide financial and administrative support services to the BPDA.

The FASS shall consist of the following divisions:
a. Finance Division (FD);
b. Administrative Support Division (ASD)

SECTION 7. Office of the Director General — The operations and management
functions of the BPDA shall be vested to the Director General who will also sit as Vice
Chairperson of the Bangsamoro Economic Development Council (BEDC). The Director
General shall also serve as the Chief Executive Officer immediately responsible for
carrying out the mandate of the BPDA and the policies of the Council. The Director
General shall be appointed by the Chief Minister with the following functions:

1. Provide executive direction and supervision over the entire operation of the
BPDA;

2. Establish policies and standards for the effective and efficient operation of the
BPDA in accordance with the programs of the government;

3. Promulgate policies as may be necessary in carrying out the BPDA mandates,
plans, programs and projects;

4. Appoint, subject to civil service laws, rules and regulations, all subordinate
officers and employees, who shall enjoy security of tenure and may be removed
only for cause in accordance with law.

5. Exercise the power to discipline subordinate officials and employees under the
provisions of law;

6. Coordinate the implementation of the policies and measures approved by the
BEDC;

7. Prepare the annual budget for the operations of BPDA; and

8. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief Minister.

SECTION 8. Staffing — The BPDA shall determine its staffing pattern, as well as
responsibilities and functions of its divisions. It shall establish a human resource
management system which shall govern the selection, hiring, appointment, transfer,
promotion, or dismissal of all personnel. Such system shall aim to establish
professionalism and excellence in the performance of its functions and responsibilities.

SECTION 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within 90 days from the
approval of this Act, the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of this Act shall be
promulgated and approved by the Chief Minister. The implementing rules and
regulations provided for under this Act shall be reviewed periodically, and revised, if
necessary.

SECTION 10. Appropriations — Funds necessary for BPDA operations shall be
included in the annual appropriations of the BARMM submitted to the Parliament for
approval, subject to the usual auditing rules and regulations.

SECTION 11. Transfer of Functions and Assets of Regional Planning and
Development Office (RPDO) to the Bangsamoro Planning and Development Authority.
- All functions, programs, projects and activities which are being undertaken by the
Regional Planning and Development Office (RPDO) including its Assets shall be
transferred to the BPDA.

SECTION 12. Separability Clause. — Should any provision of this Act be found
unconstitutional by a court of law, such provision shall be severed from the remainder of



============================================================
PAGE 4
============================================================
oOwmon Aun BWN FE

SECTION 11. Transfer of Functions and Assets of Regional Planning and
Development Office (RPDO) to the Bangsamoro Planning and Development
Authority. - All functions, programs, projects and activities which are being undertaken
by the Regional Planning and Development Office (RPDO) including its Assets shall be
transferred to the BPDA.

SECTION 12. Separability Clause. — Should any provision of this Act be found
unconstitutional by a court of law, such provision shall be severed from the remainder of
this Act, and such action shall not affect the enforceability of the remaining provisions of
this Act.

SECTION 13. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, letters of instruction,
resolutions, orders or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

SECTION 14. Effectivity Clause. - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its publication in two (2) newspapers of local circulation in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG
Speaker of the Parliament

This Act was finally passed into law on ,2019 Gregorian
Calendar and th day of , 1441, Hijra Calendar.

RABY ANGKAL
Secretary General

AHOD BALAWAG EBRAHIM
Interim Chief Minister

Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY GENERAL

RECEIVED

pole, 10-24-19
Time: 4 - 5S

By:
Signature:
