# BTA Parliament Bill No. 95

**AN ACT APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF FIFTY MILLION PESOS (PHP50,000,000.00) TO FUND THE ACQUISITION OF ADDITIONAL OXYGEN TANKS TO BE DISTRIBUTED IN THE DIFFERENT PROVINCES OF THE BARMM**

---

**Parliament:** BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 1
**Bill Number:** 95
**Status:** Approved
**As of:** 07/15/2021

**Principal Author(s):** ADIONG, ZIAUR-RAHMAN A., TAN, NABIL A., PACASEM, UBAIDA C.

**Co-Author(s):** ALI, IBRAHIM D., LOONG, DON MUSTAPHA A., YU EKEY, NARCISO CO, MAWALLIL, AMILBAHAR S., LATIPH, MAISARA DANDAMUN, TAGO, PAISALIN P., ASMAWIL, MUSLIMA A., SEMA, ROMEO K., ESMAEL, ABDULADZIS M., KARON, BAINON G., ALAMIA, LAISA M., JAJURIE, RAISSA H., LOONG, DON MUSTAPHA A., DIAMLA, MUSA K. S., PANGANDAMAN, NABILA MARGARITA P., ISMAEL, RASUL E., ANAYATIN, SUSANA S., RIMBANG, EDRIEZA H.N., SEMA, OMAR YASSER C., HASHIM, ABDULLAH B., MUÑOZ, HUSSEIN P., SILONGAN, AIDA M., ABAS, HARON M., CANDAO, BAI MALEIHA B., SALI, AL-SYED A., PANGANDAMAN, NABILA MARGARITA P., BURAHAN, ABRAHAM T., MASTURA, SITTIE SHAHARA I.

## Legislative History

FILED
FIRST STAGE
SESSION NO. 59
JUNE 17, 2021
SECOND READING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FINANCE BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT
SESSION NO. 61
JUNE 23, 2021
COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 78 & 79  RE-BILL NO. 95 ADOPTED
SESSION NO. 65
JULY 15, 2021
APPROVED BAA AS NO. 21
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE USE OF FIFTY MILLION  PESOS (PHP50,000,000.00) FOR  THE ACQUISITION OF ADDITIONAL OXYGEN TANKS TO BE CHARGED AGAINST THE 2021 QUICK RESPONSE FUND ON HEALTH OF THE BANGSAMORO GOVERNMENT
SESSION NO. 65
JULY 15, 2021

## Documents

- [Filed Copy (PDF)](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Bill-No.-95-EnhancedMP-Ziaur-Rahman-Alonto-Adiong-MP-Atty.-Nabil-A.-Tan.pdf)

---

*Source: [https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills/an-act-appropriating-the-sum-of-fifty-million-pesos-php50000000-00-to-fund-the-acquisition-of-additional-oxygen-tanks-to-be-distributed-in-the-different-provinces-of-the-barmm/](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills/an-act-appropriating-the-sum-of-fifty-million-pesos-php50000000-00-to-fund-the-acquisition-of-additional-oxygen-tanks-to-be-distributed-in-the-different-provinces-of-the-barmm/)*

## Full Text

============================================================
PAGE 1
============================================================
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Cotabato City

Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
Parliament
BILLS AND INDEX DIVISION

Second Regular Session

BTA BILL NO. 4 4

Introduced by MP Ziaur-Rahman Alonto Adiong, MP Atty. Nabil A. Tan,
MP Atty. Ubaida C. Pacasem

EXPLANATORY NOTE

While the Government has already rolled out its vaccination program, developing herd
immunity is yet to be seen especially with the limited number of available vaccines worldwide.
This is exacerbated by the introduction of new variants of the COVID-19 virus, which experts
allude to as the cause of the sudden surge in the number of cases in the Philippines beginning in
March 2021.

Based on statistics, on April 2, 2021 alone, the Philippines recorded an additional 15,310
COVID-19 cases. The country’s highest single-day tally at present.! And, on April 26, this year,
the Philippines breached the 1-million mark after tallying 8,929 new infections bringing the total
number of cases to 1,006,428.? As of May 4, 2021, the total number of cases in the Philippines is
1,062,225 with 69,466 active cases, 975,234 recovered and 17, 525 recorded deaths based on
official documents. In the case of the BARMM, there are 5,848 COVID-19 confirmed cases, 402
active cases, 5,302 recovered and 144 recorded deaths as of the latter said date.?

The alarming surge of cases has left the health sector to exhaustion. It is reported that
nearly 80% of the ICU capacity in Metro Manila has already been filled and 70% of isolation beds
occupied.* As a result, people are forced to do home medications with some private hospitals in
Metro Manila offering home services. There is a sudden increase in the demand for oxygen tanks
as private citizens began to hoard supplies in anticipation of not being accommodated in the
hospitals due to the lack of bedspace. The Department of Health (DOH) has already advised local
suppliers to regulate the sale of oxygen tanks to prevent a shortage in hospitals and medical
facilities.°

It should be emphasized that one of the reasons why people are dying during this pandemic
is the inability of hospitals to accommodate and respond early to cases with severe symptoms. The
simple reason behind this phenomenon is that our medical facilities have almost reached their full

on; ~ian Bonz. “PH Logs ranma new derma 19 cases at 15,310.” Rappler. April 2, 2021.

: : / : ii s-april-2-2021 (accessed May 3, 2021).
Magsambol, rr “Philippine reaches _ grim milestone of 1 i COVID-19 Cases.” Rappler, April 26,

l ke $-Cases ; -2021 (accessed May 3, 2021).

3“COVID- 19 Tr. soker: ° — tment of Health. https: /idoh. gov. chifeovidl Darekar (accessed May 3, 2021)
*“Coronavirus: Filipinos stock up on oxygen tanks as hospitals creak under pressure of surging cases.” The South
China Morning Post, April 6, 2021. https:/Awww.scmp.com/news/asia/southeast-asia/article/3 128449/coronavirus-
filipinos-stock-oxygen-tanks-hospitals-creak (accessed May 3, 2021).
° Gonzales, Cc athrine. “DOH urges suppliers to regulate sale of oxygen tanks.” Inquirer.net, April 7, 2021

: i lie -tanks (accessed May 3,

2021).


============================================================
PAGE 2
============================================================
capacity. As such, access to necessary oxygen and ventilators is getting scarce with more people
requiring these types of equipment for their treatment. Moreover, our medical frontliners are also
getting infected with the spread of new variants of the COVID-19 virus.

On the account of the aforesaid predicaments, this bill is being introduced as a pre-emptive
measure to guarantee the sufficient supply of oxygen in our medical facilities in the Region. If
realized, the same will serve as a buffer stock to contend the possible scarcity of required oxygen
so that BARMM constituents will not be deprived of oxygen tanks should there be supply
shortages in the future as the number of COVID-19 cases is rapidly increasing.

In view of the foregoing, this representation is seeking the support of his colleagues for

(

the immediate passage of this Bill into law.

HON. ZWAUR-RAHMAN ALONTO ADIONG
Member of the Parliament

HON. ATTY. UBAI PACASEM, CPA
Member of the Parliament


============================================================
PAGE 3
============================================================
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

BTA BILL NO.- 9 5

Introduced by MP Ziaur-Rahman A. Adiong, MP Atty. Nabil A. Tan,
MP Atty. Ubaida C. Pacasem

AN ACT
APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF FIFTY MILLION PESOS (PHP50,000,000.00) TO FUND
THE ACQUISITION OF ADDITIONAL OXYGEN TANKS TO BE DISTRIBUTED IN THE
DIFFERENT PROVINCES OF THE BARMM.

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in session assembled:

Section 1. The sum of Fifty Million Pesos (Php 50,000,000.00) is hereby appropriated
from the Quick Response Fund (QRF) in the Bangsamoro Treasury Office not otherwise
appropriated, as additional funding and budgetary requirements for FY 2021.

Sec. 2. The amount appropriated herein shall be used for the acquisition of additional
oxygen tanks to be distributed in the different provinces of BARMM in order to ensure sufficient
supply of medical oxygen in the health facilities of the Region.

Sec. 3. The amount appropriated shall be released by the Ministry of Finance Budget and
Management (MFBM) to the Ministry of Health (MOH) subject to usual accounting and auditing
laws, rules and regulations, and said funds shall be disbursed for the purpose in accordance with
existing procurement rules and regulations.

Sec. 4. The use of subject funds shall be consistent with the applicable provisions of the
Bangsamoro Autonomy Act No. 15 or the General Appropriations Act of the Bangsamoro of Fiscal
Year 2021.

Sec.5. The appropriations authorized under this Act shall be made available for release
following the effectivity of this Act.

Sec. 6. The concerned agencies shall ensure the inclusion of the details of fund
distribution in the information posted on their transparency seals.

Sec. 7. Should any part or provision of this Act be declared unconstitutional or invalid,
the other parts not affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

Sec. 8. This Act shall take effect immediately after its publication.
Approved, , 2021.

Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
Parliament
BILLS AND INDEX DIVISION

RECEIVED ]
Nam gnature:,
Date: Time:,


============================================================
PAGE 4
============================================================
AUTHORS: /

HON. ZIAUR-RAHMAN ALONTO ADIONG
Member of the Parliament

HON. ATTY. UBAI PACASEM, CPA
Member of the Parliament
