# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 193

**ESTABLISHING THE CLARK INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT CORPORATION AS A SUBSIDIARY OF THE CLARK DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION AND REPEALING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 186 FOR THIS PURPOSE.**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 193
- **Date**: April 04, 2003
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2003/eo_193_2003.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 193, April 04, 2003 ]
>
> ESTABLISHING THE CLARK INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT CORPORATION AS A SUBSIDIARY OF THE CLARK DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION AND REPEALING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 186 FOR THIS PURPOSE.
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 186 re-established the Clark International Airport Corporation (CIAC) as a subsidiary of the Bases Conversion Development Authority (BCDA) to manage and operate the Diosdado Macapagal International Airport (DMIA);
>
> **WHEREAS,** Clark Development Corporation (CDC) has a vision to develop the Clark Special Economic Zone (CSEZ) as an "aerotropolis" or a globally competitive urban center with the DMIA as centerpiece;
>
> **WHEREAS,** in order to foster synergy in the development of the DMIA as well as the CSEZ, there is a need for closer coordination between the CDC as implementing arm of the CSEZ and the CIAC as the operator of the DMIA.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:
>
> **Section 1.** The Clark International Airport Corporation (CIAC) is hereby established as a subsidiary of the Clark Development Corporation (CDC) to operate and manage the Clark Civil Aviation Complex.
>
> **Section 2.** The Chairman of the CDC is hereby directed to prepare a plan to take all necessary steps towards effecting the establishment of CIAC as a subsidiary of the CDC.
>
> The Chairman of the CDC shall submit, for approval of the Office of the President, among others, the proposed articles of incorporation, the by-laws of CIAC, and its capitalization.ᇈWᑭHIL
>
> **Section 3.** The BCDA Chairman shall submit a report to the President on the action taken as soon as the establishment of CIAC as a subsidiary of the CDC shall have been completed.
>
> **Section 4.** Executive Order No. 186 dated March 10, 2003 is hereby repealed.
>
> All orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 5.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of April, in the year of our Lord, two thousand and three.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
> By the President
>
> (Sgd.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
