# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 188

**TRANSFERRING THE COMMISSION ON POPULATION FROM THE NATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY TO THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AND THEN PLACING IT UNDER THE CONTROL AND SUPERVISION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 188
- **Date**: March 24, 2003
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2003/eo_188_2003.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 188, March 24, 2003 ]
>
> TRANSFERRING THE COMMISSION ON POPULATION FROM THE NATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY TO THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AND THEN PLACING IT UNDER THE CONTROL AND SUPERVISION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
>
> WHEREAS, pursuant to Letter of Implementation No. 37 dated December 11, 1975, the Commission on Population was transferred from the Office of the President and attached to the Department of Health;
>
> **WHEREAS,** under Executive Order No. 123 dated January 30, 1987, the Commission was attached to the Department of Social Welfare and Development;
>
> **WHEREAS,** by virtue of Executive Order No. 408 dated June 18, 1990, it was again transferred to the Office of the President;
>
> **WHEREAS,** under Executive Order No. 476 dated August 14, 1991, the Commission was placed under the National Economic and Development Authority;
>
> **WHEREAS,** in order to facilitate coordination of policies and programs relative to population, it is deemed necessary to place the Commission under the control and supervision of the Department of Health;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Book III, Title III, Chapter 10, Section 31 (3) of the Administrative Code of 1987, authorizes the President to "[T]ransfer any agency under the Office of the President to any other department or agency as well as transfer agencies to the Office of the President from other departments or agencies;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:
>
> **Section** l. The Commission on Population is hereby transferred to the Office of the President and then attached to the Department of Health.
>
> **Section 2.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.ᇈWᑭHIL
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of March, in the year of our Lord, two thousand and three.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
