# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 246

**DESIGNATING CALAMBA CITY AS REGIONAL CENTER OF REGION IV-A (CALABARZON)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 246
- **Date**: October 28, 2003
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2003/eo_246_2003.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 246, October 28, 2003 ]
>
> DESIGNATING CALAMBA CITY AS REGIONAL CENTER OF REGION IV-A (CALABARZON)
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 103 dated May 17, 2003, divided Region IV into IV-A (CALABARZON) and IV-B and transferred Aurora Province to Region III
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Regional Development Council IV-A affirmed the choice of Calamba City as the site of the regional center for Region IV-A having been established as a center of industrial development and urban activities; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** the establishment of Calamba City as regional center will foster better coordination and promote efficiency in the discharge of functions between and among agencies operating in the CALABARZON area.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law. Do hereby order
>
> **Section 1.** Calamba City is hereby designated as the regional center of Region IV-A (CALABARZON).
>
> **Section 2.** The Regional Development Council of Region IV-A shall immediately undertake necessary steps for the site development of the CALABARZON regional center in Calamba City
>
> **Section 3.** All national line agencies shall locate their regional offices in Calamba City as soon as possible and provide the necessary budgetary and other requirements for this purpose.
>
> **Section 4.** All orders, rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.ᇈWᑭHIL
>
> **Section 5.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.
>
> (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
