# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 216

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 70 DATED FEBRUARY 11, 2002, ENTITLED "DECLARING PORTIONS OF THE PROPERTY OF THE BASES CONVERSION AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY LOCATED IN FORT BONIFACIO AND ITS ENVIRONS AS SOCIALIZED HOUSING SITES AND PROVIDING FOR THE DISPOSITION THEREOF TO QUALIFIED OCCUPANTS AND BENEFICIARIES**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 216
- **Date**: June 09, 2003
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2003/eo_216_2003.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 216, June 09, 2003 ]
>
> AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 70 DATED FEBRUARY 11, 2002, ENTITLED "DECLARING PORTIONS OF THE PROPERTY OF THE BASES CONVERSION AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY LOCATED IN FORT BONIFACIO AND ITS ENVIRONS AS SOCIALIZED HOUSING SITES AND PROVIDING FOR THE DISPOSITION THEREOF TO QUALIFIED OCCUPANTS AND BENEFICIARIES
>
> WHEREAS, there exists a territorial dispute between the City of Makati and the Municipality of Taguig over Fort Bonifacio;
>
> **WHEREAS,** portions of the properties declared for socialized housing sites are included in the pending territorial dispute between Makati and Taguig;
>
> **WHEREAS,** due to the pending territorial dispute between Makati and Taguig, both the City Government of Makati and the Municipality of Taguig ought to be included as members of the Executive Committee created for the purpose of implementing this project;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 3 of Executive Order No. 70, s. 2002, is hereby amended to read as follows:ammy
>
> > "SEC. 3. Executive Committee. An Executive Committee shall be created to assist HUDCC in implementing this Order. This committee shall be composed of HUDCC as Chair, and the following as members: BCDA, Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor (PCUP), Department of National Defense/Armed Forces of the Philippines DND/AFP in so far as military personnel residing in the areas covered, the Municipal Government of Taguig, the Congressional Representative of Taguig, the City Government of Makati and the Congressional Representative of Makati City for District II.
>
> **Section 2.** All orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.ᇈWᑭHIL
>
> **Section 3.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> **DONE,** in the City of Manila this 9th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
