# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 241

**PROCLAMATION NO. 241 MODIFYING THE NOMENCLATURE AND THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON VARIOUS PRODUCTS UNDER SECTION 104 OF THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978 (PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1464, AS AMENDED )**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 241
- **Date**: October 02, 2003
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2003/eo_241_2003.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 241, October 02, 2003 ]
>
> PROCLAMATION NO. 241 MODIFYING THE NOMENCLATURE AND THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON VARIOUS PRODUCTS UNDER SECTION 104 OF THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978 (PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1464, AS AMENDED )
>
> WHEREAS, developments in the domestic and global economic environments warrant the modification in the rates of duty on certain products to provides temporary relief to local manufacturers and enable them to further enhance their competitiveness;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 401 of the tariff and Customs Code of 1978 (Presidential Decree No. 1464 ), as amended, empowers the President of the Republic of the Philippines to increase, reduce, or remove existing rates of import duty, as well as to modify the tariff nomenclature.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL–ARROYO,** President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** The articles specially listed in Annex "A" hereof, as classified under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, shall be subject to the rates of import duty for the periods in accordance with the schedule indicated in the column opposite each article;
>
> **Section 2.** The nomenclature and rates of import duty on tariff headings not enumerated and those listed but represented by the symbol "x x x " shall remain in force and in effect;
>
> **Section 3.** Upon effectivity of this Executive Order, the articles specifically listed in the aforesaid "Annex" which are entered and withdrawn from warehouse in the Philippines for consumption shall be levied the rate of duty herein prescribed;
>
> **Section 4.** All Presidential issuances, administrative rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby revoked or modified accordingly;
>
> **Section 5.** This Executive Order shall take effect thirty (30) days following its complete publication in two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of October in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.
>
> (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
