# Executive Order No. 233

**EXTENDING THE TERM OF SAMAR ISLAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT OFFICE**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 233
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1995/eo_233_1995.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 233 March 4, 1995**
>
> EXTENDING THE TERM OF SAMAR ISLAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT OFFICE
>
> WHEREAS, Samar Island Development Project Office (SIDPO) was created by Executive Order No. 397 dated April 3, 1990;
>
> WHEREAS, Section 6 of E.O. 397 provides that the term of SIDPO shall be for five (5) years from its effectivity or until April 3, 1995;
>
> WHEREAS, in order to wind up its affairs and to effect a smooth turn over of its assets and liabilities to the Office of the President as provided in said Section 6, there is a need to extend its term;
>
> NOW THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. The term of the Samar Island Development Project Office is hereby extended up to July 3, 1995. The Project and Management Unit, through its Executive Director is hereby directed to transfer its administrative Staff and all its records to its Manila Office. The Finance Office and a Commission on Audit representative of the Office of the President are hereby directed to closely monitor and supervise the winding up of SIDPO's affairs and the turn over of its assets and liabilities to ensure that the same are accomplished before the end of the extended term.
>
> Sec. 2. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> Done in the City of Manila this 31st day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred ninety five.
>
>
>
