# Executive Order No. 274

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 274
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1995/eo_274_1995.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 274 September 14, 1995**
>
> WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to promote a balanced development of each region of the country and to harness the vast potential of the countryside;
>
> WHEREAS, the implementation of the Bicol Tourism Project as adopted by the Presidential Committee on Flagship Programs and Projects, is supportive of his policy and concern for the accelerated development of the Bicol Region;
>
> WHEREAS, there is a need for an effective mechanism to coordinate and manage the implementation of the Bicol Region Tourism Master Plan, within the framework of the government's decentralization and regionalization policy as provided under Executive Order No. 363;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> SECTION 1. To ensure that an effective mechanism and linkage is instituted for the implementation of the Bicol Region Tourism Master Plan (BRTMP), there is hereby created under the Office of the President a Presidential Commission to be called the Bicol Tourism Special Development Project Commission which shall be responsible for the overall coordination and supervision of the implementation of the BRTMP. It shall be composed of the following:
>
> Secretary of Tourism C Chairman
>
> Secretary of Public Works and Highways C Vice-Chairman
>
> Secretary of Transportation and Communications C Member
>
> Secretary of Agrarian Reform C Member
>
> Secretary of Agriculture C Member
>
> Secretary of Interior and Local Government C Member
>
> Secretary of Trade and Industry C Member
>
> Chairman of the Regional Development Council, Region V C Member
>
> Governors/City Mayors of Concerned Local Government Units (LGUs) C Member
>
> The Department of Tourism shall provide technical secretariat services to the Commission.
>
> SEC. 2. The Commission shall be an advisory body to the President and shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities:
>
> a. Articulate the development goals, objectives, programs and projects of the Bicol Region Tourism Master Plan;
>
> b. Cause the update and refinement of the Bicol Region Tourism Master Plan within the context of the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan, Regional Development Plan, and the Local Development Plan of the Local government units (LGUs);
>
> c. Cause the conduct of feasibility study, evaluation, and financing of the project components of the BRTMP;
>
> d. provide overall direction, coordination, and supervision in the planning, implementation and monitoring of the BRTMP;
>
> e. Enlist the support and assistance from government and non-government institutions in planning and implementing the BRTMP;
>
> f. Enter into contracts as may be necessary in the implementation of the BRTMO, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations;
>
> g. Organize the project Management Office, define its organizational set-up, establish its staffing pattern and appoint its Project Director and staff, subject to approval of the Department of Budget and management;
>
> h. Formulate implementing rules and regulations pertaining to the internal operations of the Project Management Office; and
>
> i. Submit to the President quarterly progress reports on the project and such other reports as may be required.
>
> SEC. 3. The Commission may call upon any government agency, office or bureau for assistance in the discharge of, and form committees to facilitate the performance of, its functions and responsibilities.
>
> SEC. 4. The amount of Five Million Pesos (P5,000,000.00), to be drawn from funds of the DOT, shall be released for the operations of the Commission for 1995. Appropriations for the succeeding years shall be incorporated in the budget proposals under the Office of the President.
>
> SEC. 5. All executive issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby revoked or modified accordingly. lawphi1.net
>
> SEC. 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-five.
>
>
>
