# Republic Act No. 3791

**An Act to Amend Republic Act Numbered Thirteen Hundred and Eighty-Seven Providing for the Establishment of the University of Mindanao in Dansalan City, as Amended by Republic Act Numbered Eighteen Hundred and Nine-Three, so as to Change the Name of the University of Mindanao to Mindanao State University and to Grant a Permanent Site to the Said University**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 3791
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1963/ra_3791_1963.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 3791**
>
> **An Act to Amend Republic Act Numbered Thirteen Hundred and Eighty-Seven Providing for the Establishment of the University of Mindanao in Dansalan City, as Amended by Republic Act Numbered Eighteen Hundred and Nine-Three, so as to Change the Name of the University of Mindanao to Mindanao State University and to Grant a Permanent Site to the Said University**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section one of Republic Act Numbered Thirteen hundred and eighty-seven, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 1. There is hereby established in Marawi City, a university which shall be known as the Mindanao State University, the same being organized as a corporation under that name."
>
> Section 2. A new section is hereby inserted between sections fifteen and sixteen of Republic Act Numbered Thirteen hundred and eighty-seven, as amended, to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 16. The present site of the University which has been reserved for its use by Proclamation Numbered Eight hundred and six issued by the President of the Republic of the Philippines, covering one thousand hectares, more or less, located in the City of Marawi, Island of Mindanao, is hereby granted to the said university after its survey shall have been approved by the Director of the Bureau of Lands."
>
> **Section 3.** Sections sixteen and seventeen of Republic Act Numbered Thirteen hundred and eighty-seven, as amended, are hereby designated as sections seventeen and eighteen, respectively.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 22, 1963.
>
>
>
