# Republic Act No. 3755

**An Act Converting the Aparri School of Fisheries in the Municipality of Aparri, Province of Cagayan, into a College to be Known as the Aparri College of Fisheries, and Authorizing the Appropriation of Funds Therefor**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 3755
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1963/ra_3755_1963.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 3755**
>
> **An Act Converting the Aparri School of Fisheries in the Municipality of Aparri, Province of Cagayan, into a College to be Known as the Aparri College of Fisheries, and Authorizing the Appropriation of Funds Therefor**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Aparri School of Fisheries in the Municipality of Aparri, Province of Cagayan, is hereby converted into a college to be known as the Aparri College of Fisheries.
>
> **Section 2.** The Aparri College of Fisheries shall, in addition to the secondary curriculum, offer the following collegiate courses:
>
> (a) Four-year teacher education course leading to the degree of Bachelor of Science in Fishing Education.1âшphi1
>
> (b) Four-year technical fisheries course leading to the degree of Bachelor of Science in Fisheries.
>
> (c) Two-year technical fishery course leading to the title of Associate in Fishery.
>
> **Section 3.** The Aparri College of Fisheries shall be headed by a superintendent and shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Schools.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of Education is hereby empowered to reorganize said school accordingly.
>
> **Section 5.** In addition to the appropriation for the Aparri School of Fisheries in the General Appropriation Acts, the sum of three hundred thousand pesos is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out of any funds of the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the conversion, operation and maintenance of said college during the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-four. Thereafter, such sum for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriation Acts.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 22, 1963.
>
>
>
