# GR-262944

**People of the Philippines vs. Gianne Carla Thanaraj y Gloria**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: People of the Philippines vs. Gianne Carla Thanaraj y Gloria
- **Ponente**: LAZARO-JAVIER, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: October 12, 2020
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/G.R.No_.262944.pdf)

---

> SUPREME CCURT GF THE Fist
>
> PUBLIC_ INFORMATION OFFICE.
>
> Soivce
>
> Republic of the Whilippines
> Supreme Court
>
> slanitla
> SECOND DIVISION
> PEOPLE OF THE G.R. No. 262944
> PHILIPPINES, |
> Plaintiff-appellee, Present:
> LEONEN, SAJ., Chairperson,
> -versus- | LAZARO-JAVIER,
> LOPEZ, M.,
> LOPEZ, J., and
> GIANNE CARLA THANARAJS KHO, JR., JJ
> y GLORIA,
> Accused-appellant. Promulgated: >
> JUL 2 9 2024 lac?
> Fi
> Krenn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn ene nn nnn nanan nanan nnn Thee mma mmm amen x
> DECISION
> LOPEZ, J., J.:
>
> This Court resolves an Appeal! assailing the Decision” and Resolution?
> of the Court of Appeals (CA), which affirmed with modification the
> Judgment* of the Regional Trial Court (RTC) finding accused-appellant
> Gianne Carla Thanaraj y Gloria (Gianne) guilty beyond reasonable doubt of
> parricide under Article 246 of the Revised Penal Code against her husband,
> Mervin Roy Richard Thanaraj y Manansala (Mervin).
>
> a nt
>
> ' Rollo, pp. 3-6.
>
> 2 Id. at 9-28. The October 12, 2020 Decision in CA-G.R. CR-HC No. 11732 was penned by Associate
> Justice Ramon M. Bato, Jr. and concurred in by Associate Justices Maria Elisa Sempio Diy and Carlito
> B. Calpatura of the Sixth Division, Court of Appeals, Manila.
>
> 3 Jd. at 30. The May 26, 2022 Resolution in CA-G.R. CR-HC No. 11732 was penned by Associate Justice
> Ramon M. Bato, Jr. and concurred in by Associate Justices Maria Elisa Sempio Diy and Carlito B.
> Calpatura of the Former Sixth Division, Court of Appeals, Manila.
>
> 4 Id. at 32-42. The July 16, 2018 Judgment in Criminal Case No. C-100499 was penned by Presiding
> Judge Remigio M. Escalada, Jr. of Branch 123, Regional Trial Court, Caloocan City. 9
>
>
> ee Decision 2 GIRL No. 262944
>
> The Antecedents |
>
> The instant case stemmed from an Information? filed against Gianne,
> the accusatory portion of which reads:
>
> | That on or about the 5" day of April 2017 in Caloocan City, Metro
> ~ Manila, Philippines and within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the
> above-named accused, without any justifiable cause, with deliberate intent
> ~ to kill, did then and there willfully, unlawfully and feloniously stab her
> _ husband MERVIN ROY RICHARD THANARAJ y MANANSALA, on the
> neck, thereby inflicting upon the said victim serious physical injuries, which
> injuries caused the accused’s husband’s death.
>
> CONTRARY TO LAW.®
>
> During the arraignment on May 30, 2017, Gianne pleaded not guilty to
> the charge against her.’ After, she filed a Petition for Bail that was'denied by
> the RTC in an Order.® Trial then ensued? __
>
> The prosecution presented the following witnesses: (1) Jimar
> C. Moranta (Jimar); (2) Dr. Jian Meryl C. Co (Dr. Co); (3) Police Officer I
> Jingle Laleo (PO1 Laleo); (4) Dr. Dominic L. Aguda (Dr. Aguda); (5) Police
> Chief Inspector Argentina S. Casifio (PCINSP Casifio); and (6) Araceli
> C. Manansala (Araceli).'°
>
> On April 5, 2017, Jimar testified that he was working as a stay-in
> construction worker on a house situated beside Gianne and Mervin’s. At
> around 3:10 p.m., during his break, Jimar heard Gianne yell “tulungan niyo
> po ako, nasaksak ko ang asawa ko! Gianne then emerged from their house
> and rushed towards Jimar and his coworkers for help.”
>
> At that moment, Jimar noticed Mervin standing by their front:door, who
> was vomiting blood and his neck was covered with blood. Jimar immediately
> removed his jacket and urged his coworkers to help apply pressure on
> Mervin’s neck with it. Then, he boarded Mervin onto Gianne’s car, while
> Gianne drove it to the nearest hospital. 12
>
> At first, Jimar and Gianne brought Mervin to the Divine Heart Hospital,
> but as they were not accommodated, they went to the World of Hope General
>
> 5 Records, P. 2.
>
> & dd.
>
> 7 Id. at 45.
>
> 8 Id. at 188-192. The May 15, 2018 Order in Criminal Case No. C-100499 was penned by Presiding Judge
> Remigio M. Escalada, Jr. of Branch 123, Regional Trial Court, Caloocan City.
>
> 9 Rollo, p. 10. —
>
> 0 Td. at 11,
>
> dd.
>
> 12 Td.
>
>
> Decision 3 | G.R. No. 262944 —
>
> - Hospital instead. Along the way, Gianne exclaimed to Jimar, “Kuya, mahal
> _ na mahal ko po ang asawa ko. Hindi ko sinasadya na saksakin siya.” After
> Mervin was admitted, Jimar went home.'?
>
> Meanwhile, Dr. Co testified that on even date, she was working at
> World of Hope General Hospital and that she tended to Mervin. She recalled
> - him sustaining a fatal stab wound on the right side of his neck. Due to
> Mervin’s unstable vital signs, Dr. Co performed an intravenous access and
> cardiopulmonary resuscitation on him. She also administered epinephrine and
> requested for an electrocardiogram for him, but, in the interim, Mervin died.'*
>
> Dr. Aguda, a medico-legal officer of the National Bureau of
> Investigation, stated that he conducted an autopsy on Mervin.’> He found that
> Mervin suffered a fatal stab wound on the right side of his neck.!*
>
> In the Autopsy Report,!’ Dr. Aguda described that Mervin’s wound was
> gaping. It was three centimeters in length with clean cut edges and diagonal
> ~ in orientation, and around 10 centimeter deep, severing a carotid artery and
> other blood vessels, as well as perforating the esophagus causing massive
> bleeding. Dr. Aguda opined that it was possible that the injury was inflicted
> by a sharp, pointed, and single bladed instrument such as a kitchen knife and
> that the assailant may have been shorter than him given the downward
> trajectory of the wound." So
>
> On redirect examination, Dr. Aguda stated that on a scale of one to 10,
> the possibility that the stab wound could have been self-inflicted was one to
> two, while the possibility that it was inflicted by another person was nine to
> 10. On recross examination, Dr. Aguda clarified that the possibility that
> Mervin’ s injury was self-inflicted was remote."
>
> Next, PCINSP Casifio testified that she was assigned at the Crime
>
> - Laboratory Office in Camp Crame, Quezon City. On April 6, 2017, she
> received a DNA Examination Request and made DNA Laboratory Report
> - with Control No. 03511.7° During trial, she presented a sealed brown envelope
> which had smaller sealed letter envelopes inside marked “MTM-1” to_
> “MTM-4” respectively containing a kitchen knife, a photograph of the knife,
>
> and three pieces of cotton buds with blood stains.” ' However, there was no
> identity on the DNA profile obtained from the evidence analyzed as no
>
> 13 Id.
>
> 4 Id. at 11-12.
>
> 'S Records, p. 158.
>
> 6 Id.
>
> 17 Yd. at 159.
>
> 18 Rollo, p. 12.
>
> 19 Td. at 13.
>
> 20 Records, pp. 162-164.
> 21 Id. at 168-169.
>
>
> Decision 4 G.R. No. 262944
>
> reference sample was taken from the accused or victim when the request was
> made.” |
>
> SPO1 Narciso claimed that after he was informed by their desk officer
> of the incident between Gianne and Mervin, he proceeded to the scene and
> was able to interview three construction workers. They informed him that a
> person was stabbed and that one of the construction workers assisted in
> bringing the victim to the hospital. However, SPO] Narciso was unable to get
> the names of the construction workers he interviewed.”*
>
> SPOI Narciso also prepared the Judicial Affidavits of Jimar and
> William L. Gonzales (William), the subdivision security guard. They both _
>
> confirmed that Gianne told them that she unintentionally stabbed her husband
>
> but SPO] Narciso had no personal knowledge of Gianne’s statement. When —
>
> he asked Gianne if she was the one who stabbed Mervin, she told him that she
>
> did not mean to do it. However, SPO] Narcisco was not able to put this 1 in
>
> | writing."
>
> Next, POL Laleo narrated that t she was assigned at Police Community
>
> - Precinct 6, Caloocan City. On the day of the incident, a duty officer informed
>
> her that a stabbing victim was brought to World of Hope General Hospital.
> PO1 Laleo proceeded there with another police officer and met with the
> Quezon City police who arrived earlier. They pointed PO1 Laleo to a room
> where Gianne was held. When PO1 Laleo interviewed Gianne, there was no
> counsel present. Gianne introduced herself as Mervin’s wife and that Mervin
> was the victim of the stabbing. Gianne also told PO1 Laleo that she did not
>
> _ intend to stab her husband, but this statement was not reduced into writing.
>
> After they spoke, Gianne was brought to Dr. J ose Rodriguez Memorial
>
> ‘Hospital for a : medical examination.”°
>
> Finally, Araceli, Mervin’s mother, was presented. During trial, she
> identified Gianne in open court and presented a duly authenticated copy of |
> Gianne and Mervin’s Report of Marriage”® issued by the Philippine Statistics
> Authority as well as Mervin’s Death Certificate.”’ :
>
> On the day of the incident, Araceli disclosed that she was in, Malaysia,
> but after learning about Mervin’s death, she booked a flight to the Philippines
> the following day. Two hours before Mervin’s death, Araceli claimed that she
> spoke to him on Viber regarding the delivery of the brand-new Honda CRV
> she purchased for him. She stated that Mervin did not inform her of any
>
> ‘difficult problems he was facing, though Araceli was aware that Gianne and
>
> 2 Rollo, pp. 13—14.
> 23 Id. at 14. .
> 24 Id. .
>
> 25 Id. at 15.
>
> 26 Records, p. 156.
>
> 27 Rollo, p. 15.
>
>
> Decision Se 5 G.R. No. 262944
>
> ~ Mervin would often. quarrel due to Gianne’ s fear that Mervin was being
> unfaithful to her.?8 |
>
> Araceli also raised that she shouldered Mervin’s hospital bills —
> - amounting to PHP 30,000.00 and that she spent around PHP 2 to 3 million for
> _ his funeral expenses. However, she was unable to provide receipts for this.
>
> She also claimed to have spent a total of PHP 200,000.00 for attorney’ s fees
> and litigation expenses, 29
>
> ; On the part of the defense, Gianne was presented as its lone witness.
> Gianne narrated that she and Mervin married on August 3, 2012. They resided
> in Malaysia from the time they were wed until July 2016, when they moved
> back to the Philippines.*°
>
> On April 5, 2017, Gianne and Mervin had lunch together in their house.
> After that, Gianne washed the dishes and went upstairs to put their two
> children to sleep. At 1:30 p.m., she went back down to bake brownies in the
>
> kitchen while Mervin sat in the living room.*!
>
> - While Gianne baked, Mervin suddenly approached Gianne to hug and
> kiss her from behind. Mervin then asked her for PHP 100,000.00, but she
>
> ~ refused to give him any for she claimed that he would only gamble with it.
>
> Because of this, Mervin grew angry and told her that she was useless and a
> good! for nothing.”
>
> Out of frustration, Gianne walked away from him. At the time, she
> wanted to leave the house to cool down her emotions, so she went upstairs to
> grab her wallet and one of their children. However, when she went downstairs,
> she saw Mervin standing in front of the main door with a knife in his hand. At
> first, Gianne tried to appease Mervin and told him “tama na, nakakapagod na,
> _ maghiwalay na lang tayo.” He replied ‘puro hiwalay na lang, lagi na lang
> hiwalay.” Then, using his right hand, Mervin held the knife on the right side
> of his neck gesturing that he was going to stab himself.*?
>
> - At that point, Gianne claimed that she was unphased by Mervin’s
> ~ behavior because it was not the first time he threatened her. Mervin would
> often. say that he would kill himself if they separated, 34
>
> 8 Td,
>
> 29 Id.
>
> 30. Td. at 16.
> 31d.
>
> 32 Td.
>
> 33 Id.
> 34 Td. at 17.
>
>
> Decision re re G.R. No. 262944
>
> Still, Gianne tried to move past him to open the front door. During their
> scuffle, Gianne saw blood on Mervin’s neck. She then went outside to call for
> help from a group of construction workers nearby, as well as the subdivision
>
> ‘Security guard, William.
>
> ‘Gianne averred that Jimar, one of the construction workers, —
> - accompanied her, Mervin, William, and one of her children to Divine Heart
> Hospital. However, the hospital staff informed them that they could not be
> accommodated, so they went to World of Hope General Hospital instead
> where Mervin was admitted.°°
>
> | Gianne denied intentionally stabbing Mervin or causing his death. She
> insisted that Mervin accidentally cut himself when she attempted to pass by
> him to get to their front door. Gianne also recalled that on the day of the
> — incident, Mervin was troubled over their household's financial expenses and
> losses 1 in their food business.*’ ae
>
> In its judgment: 38 : the RTC found Gianne guilty of the crime of
> parricide. The dispositive portion of the Judgment states:
>
> WHEREFORE, in light of the foregoing, accused GIANNE.
> CARLA THANARAJ y GLORIA is hereby found GUILTY beyond —
> reasonable doubt of the crime of Parricide, defined and penalized under
> Article 246 of the Revised Penal Code, for the death of her husband Mervin
> Roy Richard Thanaraj y Manansala, and she is thus sentenced to suffer the
> penalty of reclusion perpetua. |
>
> As to civil liability, the accused is adjudged LIABLE to the heirs of
> Mervin Roy Richard Thanaraj y Manansala, excluding herself, for civil .
> indemnity of Seventy-Five Thousand Pesos ([PHP] 75,000.00), moral
> damages of Seventy-Five Thousand Pesos ([PHP] 75,000.00), and
> - exemplary damages of Seventy-Five Thousand Pesos ([PHP] 75,000.00). |
>
> Costs against the accused. . a
>
> SO ORDERED.* (Emphasis in the original)
>
> The RTC found that the Prosecution was able to prove the elements of
> parricide and establish Gianne’s guilt with proof beyond reasonable doubt. It
> gave credence to the testimonies of the witnesses, particularly Jimar’s, when
> he heard Gianne say that she stabbed Mervin as this was corroborated by PO]
> Laleo. The RTC likewise appreciated Gianne’s statements to them as
> extrajudicial confession that she committed t the crime."
>
> 35 Jd. at 16.
> 36 Td.
> 37 Id. at 17.
> 38 Id. at 32-42.
> 39 Id. at 42.
> 40 Id. at 41.
>
>
> Decision . 7 oo G.R: No. 262944
>
> More, it found that the prosecution witnesses were able to narrate what
> _ transpired in a clear, categorical, and straightforward manner without any
> showing of ill motive on their part in testifying on the matter.’ The RTC also
> - emphasized the nature and location of the stab wound sustained by Mervin on
>
> his neck, which was found by Dr. Aguda as remotely possible 1 to have been
>
> ‘self-inflicted, Thus, it convicted Gianne of parricide.”
>
> | However, the RIC did not award actual damages to the heirs of the
> victim for lack of evidence presented by the prosecution regarding the funeral
> and burial expenses spent by Araceli. Nonetheless, it awarded civil indemnity,
> moral damages, and exemplary damages in the amount of PHP 75,000.00
> each.' SU
>
> - Agerieved, Gianne appealed to the CA.
>
> In the assailed Decision,” the CA affirmed Gianne’s conviction but
> _ increased the amount of damages to be paid to the victim’s heirs. The
> dispositive portion of the Decision reads:
>
> WHEREFORE, the appeal is DENIED for lack of merit. The -
>
> - Judgment dated [July 16, 2018] of the Regional Trial Court, Branch 123 of
> Caloocan City, NCJR, in Criminal Case No. C-100499, convicting Gianne
> Carla Thanaraj y Gloria of the crime of parricide penalized under Article
> 246 of the Revised Penal Code and sentencing her to suffer the penalty of
> reclusion perpetua is AFFIRMED with MODIFICATION in that, Gianne
> _is directed to pay the heirs of Mervin Roy Richard Thanaraj y Manansala,
>
> excluding herself, the sum of [PHP] 100,000.00 as civil indemnity,
>
> [PHP] 100,000.00 as moral damages, and [PHP] 100,000.00 as exemplary
> damages.
>
> SO ORDERED, “ (Emphasis in the original)
>
> In upholding Gianne’s conviction, the CA also found that the elements
> of the crime were proven by the prosecution.” It found that Gianne’s
> statement that she did not intend to stab Mervin did not absolve her from
> _ criminal liability as it was not just an extrajudicial confession, but a res gestae
> statement admissible in evidence against her under Rule 130, Section 26 of
> the Rules of Court.*8 |
>
> However, the CA disregarded Gianne’s statement to POL Laleo as it
> was obtained through questioning without the assistance of counsel while
>
> a Id.
>
> 42 Td.
>
> 43 Id. .
>
> 44 Records, pp. 274-26.
> 4S Rollo, pp. 9-28.
>
> 46 Jd, at 28.
>
> 47 Jd. at 19.
>
> 48 Jd. at 20.
>
>
> Decision _ — oo 8 G.R. No. 262944
> under custodial investigation, which j is violative under Article Ii, Section 12
>
> of the Constitution.
>
> Lastly, the CA did x not consider Gianne’ s argument that Mervin’s stab
> wound was self-inflicted as Dr. Aguda testified that the chances of it being
> one were low.” |
>
> Undet erred, Gianne moved for reconsideration, which was denied by
>
> the CA ina Resolution. 31
>
> Hence, Gianne filed the instant Appeal. —
> Gianne agus that the CA erred in upholding her conviction.
>
> - Gianne contests the credibility of Jimar, whose testimony formed the
> basis of the RTC’s ruling. To recall, Jimar heard her say “tulungan niyo po
> ako, nasaksak ko ang asawa ko! (Help me, I stabbed my husband!) and “kuya,
>
> - mahal na mahal ko po ang asawa ko. Hindi ko sinasadya na saksakin siya” (1
>
> love my husband so much. I didn’t mean to stab him). These were admitted
>
> . by the CA as res gestae.”
>
> Next, Gianne points out that in the prosecution’s Formal Offer of
> Evidence,>? it dispensed with William’s testimony as it corroborated Jimar’s.
> However, in denying Gianne’s Petition for Bail, the RTC considered the
> same,‘ As stated in the Order regarding Gianne’s Petition for Bail, the RTC
>
> | ratiocinated:
>
> Such is the kind of declaration [res gestae] of the accused in this case. To
> witness Moranta, the accused stated, “tulungan nyo po ako nasaksak ko ang
> asawa ko” and “kuya mahal na mahal ko po ang asawa ko hindi ko sinasadya
> na saksakin sya [. . .]” And to witness Gonzales, she uttered, “Kuya tulong
> si Mervin [. . .] Kuya di ko sinasadya, mahal na mahal kita Mervin [. . .]”
> The principal act involved here is the killing complained of which is the
> “startling occurrence[,”] and it appears that all the statements in question
> refer to the said occurrence and were apparently made by the accused before
> she had time to contrive a falsity. The essential requisites for the Court to
> admit the declarations of the accused as part of the res gestae are present,
> and unless the defense could prove otherwise by its own evidence, then these
> declarations shall be regarded as not covered by the hearsay evidence rule. ~
>
> Id at2l.
> 50 Td. at 22.
>
> 1 Jd. at 30.
>
> 2 Id. at 61.
>
> 53 Records, pp. 143-153.
> 4 “Rollo, p. 62.
>
>
> Decision . en G.R.No. 262944,
>
> In. the main then, in the light of the evidence offered by the
> ‘prosecution, particularly the testimony of Jimar Moranta, which the Court _
> finds credible, straightforward[,] and trustworthy, the Court finds the
> evidence against the accused for the crime of Parricide to be strong.°°
>
> _ Gianne counters, however, that a reading of William’s Judicial
> Affidavit®’ would show that he heard her say the following:
>
> 5. Tanong: Ano ang sumunod na nangyari?
>
> _ Sagot: Agad [namin] sinugod sa ospital, habang nasa loob kami ng
> sasakyan ay paulit-ulit na sinasabi ni Mam Carla na “Kuya, di ko
> _ sinsadya. Mahal na mahal kita Mervin” habang nagmamaneho at
> umiiyak, kaya sinabi ko kay Ma{’alm Carla na relax lang dahil parang
> wala na ito sa sarili kaya kinuha ko ang anak nito.>' (Emphasis supplied)
>
> Gianne insists that this differs from Jimar’s recollection. In William’s
> statement, there were no particulars supplanted as to whether Gianne admitted
> that she was the one who stabbed Mervin intentionally or otherwise. Further,
> William observed that she looked confused and seemed out of her mind due
> to shock. Thus, Jimar’s statement that she admitted stabbing her husband was
> involuntarily made and inaccurate. Also, both Jimar and William had no
> knowledge on how Mervin sustained the wound.°® )
>
> Lastly, Gianne immediately called for help after Mervin accidentally
> hurt himself, which controverts the prosecution’s argument that she intended
> to kill him. $9 :
>
> This Court’s Ruling
> - We acquit.
> In cases of parricide, Article 246 of the Revised Penal Code provides:
>
> Article 246. Parricide. —- Any person who shall kill his father, mother, or
> child, whether legitimate or illegitimate, or any of his ascendants, or
> descendants, or his spouse, shall be guilty of parricide and shall be punished
> by the penalty of reclusion perpetua to death.
>
> Parricide is committed when: (1) a person is killed: (2) the accused is
> the killer; and (3) the deceased is either the legitimate spouse of the accused,
> or any legitimate or illegitimate parent, child, ascendant or descendant of the
>
> _ ». Records, pp. 190, 192.
> 56 Jd. at 10-12.
>
> 57 Td. at 11.
>
> Rollo, p. 66.
>
> 9 Id. at 68.
>
>
> Decision | 10 GR. No. 262944
>
> accused. Notably, the relationship of the offender to the victim is an essential
> element to the c crime.”
>
> Here, the fact of Mervin’s death remains undisputed and was proven
> ‘through the presentation of his Death Certificate.®’ Further, the marriage
> between the parties was established through the presentation. of their Report
> of Marriage which, likewise, formed part of the stipulations’ during
> pre-trial, having been admitted by accused-appellant herself. |
>
> After a review of the records, this Court is inclined to rule in favor of
> accused-appellant as the prosecution was unable to prove her guilt beyond
> reasonable doubt. —
>
> One of the primary considerations of the CA in upholding
> accused-appellant’s conviction was the extent, nature, and trajectory of the
> wound sustained by Mervin through the findings of Dr. Aguda.
>
> | In the Autopsy Report, it was ; emphasized by Dr. Aguda that Mervin’s
> stab wound does not appear to be self-inflicted:
>
> Atty. Lobo
> Q: Will you describe to the Court the size, the depth of the stab wound
> | sustained by the victim?
>
> A: The stab wound on the right side of the neck is [three] centimeters
> in length with clean cut edges, diagonally oriented with medial
> extremity and the later extremity sharp located at the right side of
> the neck, specifically around 10 centimeters below and one
> centimeter in front of the right external [auditory meatus] and the~
>
> - stab wound was directed downward, forward, and [medially]
> involving the skin and underline muscle tissues severing the artery
> and other blood vessel, perforating | the esophagus with a depth of
> around 10 centimeters, sir.
>
> That stab wound or injury sustained by the victim in that part of the
> body is actually ascertained, is that correct?
> Yes|,| sir.
>
> And as a medico legal officer[,] were you able to at least determine
> the probable object used to inflict that injury?
>
> Well, the object inflicting the injury could have been a sharp,
> pointed, single bladed instrument, an example of which is a kitchen
> knife, sir.
>
> Q: As a medico legal officer, were you able to at least approximate or
> determine the probable person, in other words, is the stab wound
> [could] be inflicted by the deceased himself to his body or to his
> neck?
>
> 69 People v: Delos Santos, 889 Phil. 482, 490 (2020) [Per J. Lazaro- Javier, Second Division].
> 1 Records, pp. 154-155.
> 2 Td at 51,
>
>
> Decision
>
> >
>
> ae © re a G.R. No. 262944
>
> It could be far from reality that it was self-inflicted it must have
> been inflicted by another person, sir.
>
> Why do you say that doctor?
>
> Considering that a stab wound at the right side of the neck, the
> direction or the trajectory of the wound was the forward,
> downward], ] and [medially], and papunta po sa gitna, so [it’s] very
>
> _ impossible for him to have inflicted that injury himself, sir.
>
> In other words, what are you saying is the one who inflicted the stab
> wound must have been another person and not the deceased?
> Yes], Js sir. (Emphasis supplied)
>
> Dr. Aguda highlighted that the incision made on Mervin’s neck was
> three centimeters in length and around 10 centimeters deep, which caused
> massive bleeding. He further emphasized that it was improbable that the stab
> wound was caused by him as it was aimed from a frontwards direction towards
> Mervin’s neck and not backwards, which would have been the case, had it
>
> _ been self-inflicted. Thus, it was highly unlikely for Mervin to have done the
>
> same to himself even if accidental. This was confirmed by Dr. Aguda during
> cross-examination:
>
> G3
> 64
>
> You said earlier that you discounted the possibility that the victim
> made a self]-Jinfliction to him, is that correct?
> Yes[,] sir.
>
> - But there is also a probability that when for instance a person
>
> [commits] suicide[,] that is the trajectory made?
> I would say a small, slim possibility, sir.
>
> But nonetheless doctor[,] there is a possibility?
> There is a small possibility, sir.
>
> In redirect and recross examination, Dr. Aguda maintained his stance:
>
> Q:
>
> In your answer earlier doctor is to the effect that in the scale of one
>
> to [10], you said only one or two is the possibility that the wound -
>
> was selff- “hintlicted?
> Yes[,] sir.
>
> While you gave a scale of nine to [10] that the said wound was
> inflicted by another person? |
>
> -Yes[,] Sir.
>
> That is only your opinion?
>
> ‘That is my opinion, sir.
>
> You cannot show to the Court any fi ndings which would support that
> opinion of yours? | |
>
> TSN, Dr. Dominic L. Aguda, September 18, 2017, pp. 17-19.
>
> Id, at 22-23.
>
>
> Decision Oo 12 . - GR.No. 262944
>
> A: Well, I just based it on the trajectory of the stab wound, it is more or
> less inflicted by another person considering that the trajectory is
> forward, downward|,| and [medially], because if it was
> self|-linflicted|, | it is very awkward and the trajectory should have
> been backward and not forward, sir.
>
> Q: Doctor|,| when you say that the thrust of the instrument that was
> | used in inflicting the injury was forward, you meant that the thrust
> was towards the face? | |
>
> Yes|,| your honor.
>
> _ If it’s backward, it’s against the direction of the face?
> Yes|, | your Honor.
>
> One more point doctor|,| since you are talking of the probabilities.
> You are talking of intentional infliction, what could be the likelihood
> that the injury was caused accidentally?
>
> That would be remote, your Honor.
>
> Very remote? — |
> _ Very remote, your Honor.
>
> Even if the thrust was made accidentally by the victim himself?
> That would be remote also, your Honor. |
>
> ~ However, We find that Dr. Aguda’s statements are not conclusive proof
> _of accused-appellant’s guilt. To this Court’s mind, it merely establishes that
> there was a remote possibility for the wound to have been self-inflicted.
>
> Further, the attending circumstances, which led to the stabbing incident
>
> particularly the trajectory of the wound, negates whether a wound is
> self-inflicted or not.
>
> To recall, during their fight, accused-appellant W went upstairs to retrieve
> her keys and get their second child. At the time, she claimed that she wanted
> to leave the house in order to cool her emotions, until Mervin again threatened
> her with suicide.
>
> Mervin’s constant threats of suicide imposed a psychological burden on
>
> accused-appellant. In her testimony, she disclosed the following: ,
>
> Q: Let’s go back to the incident that transpired at your house, you said
> that Mervin placed the knife that he was holding at the right portion
> of his neck and he was trying to prevent you from leaving the house,
> is that correct? _
>
> A: Yes[,] sir.
>
> 65 Jd. at 32, 34.
>
>
> . Decision
>
> 13 GR. No. 262944
>
> Why did you still try to leave notwithstanding that Mervin was |
> trying to prevent you and that he was holding a knife against his
> neck?
>
> Because I was used to him doing that, telling me that if we will
>
> | _ separate or part ways[,] he will kill himself, sir.
>
> You said that you were already used to that, that Mervin was 5 doing
> that thing; you mean there were already previous incidents that
> Mervin told you that he will kill himself when you told him that you
> will separate? .
>
> Yes|, | sir.
>
> - When was the last time did Mervin do that, if you can recall?
>
> In 2014, sir.
>
> You mentioned that at around 2014, you were living in Malaysia, is ©
> that right? |
>
> Yes[,] sir.
>
> So that incident happened at your house in Malaysia?
> In the house of my in-laws, sir.
>
> Do you still recall the incident leading to that action of Mervin in
>
> - 2014 where he threatened to kill himself if you will separate? —
> — Yes[,] sir.
>
> What was the cause of that? —
>
> -_ Mervin was very jealous at that time and he was confused, sir.
>
> Aside from that[,] was there any other incident? »
> Yes[,] sir.
>
> | When was that?
>
> Around 2015, sir.
>
> What was that incident all about?
> About his temper and being jealous, sir.
>
> You mean he also threatened you that he will kill himself also on
> that occasion?
> Yes[,] sir.
>
> _ Prior to your quarrel on April 5, 2017, do you recall if you had any
>
> quarrel with Mervin also?
> Yes|,| sir.
>
> When was that?
> In February 20177, sir.
> Do you still recall what was the quarrel all about?
>
> Yes[,] sir.
>
> What?
> About the casino, sir.
>
> What was about pagka-casino, you mean you had quarrel because of
> his frequenting the casino?
>
> ;
>
>
> Decision 14 G.R. No. 262944
>
> A: Yes[,] sir.
>
> It appears that in three separate instances, in 2014, 2015, and this
>
> particular incident, Mervin threatened accused-appellant with suicide if she |
>
> would leave him. Notably, during accused-appellant’s testimony, she was
> visibly distraught as she recounted the incident between her and Mervin.
> | Yet, despite this, the parties would often reconcile until they quarreled again.
>
> Continuing with the testimony of accused-appellant, after she refused
>
> | to give money to Mervin to gamble, they argued: |
> Did you give him the said amount? _
> No sir, because I knew where Mervin will use the money.
>
> Where did Mervin supposed to use the money, if you know?
> iH know that he will go to a casino, sir. |
>
> Where?
> In Solaire Manila, sir.
>
> >O PO PO
>
> Why was he asking the money from you, were you the custodian of
> your fund? 7
> Some of our money was in my custody because Mervin already u used
> all the money that was withdrawn from the bank, Sir.
>
> >
>
> . When you refused to. give Mervin the amount of one hundred
> thousand pesos, what was the reaction of Mervin? , :
> He got mad, sir. -
>
> And what did he do? |
> Mervin told me so many things and among those was I’m not
> working and I was as useless, I was good for nothing, sir.
>
> PQ RF
>
> And what was your reply to those utterances by Mervin?
> We had a confrontation at that time that’ s why I walk{ed] out, sir.°
>
> an
>
> These instances show the desire of accused-appellant to leave the
> house together with their child, despite the threats of Mervin to kill himself.
> In doing so, it was unclear whether she. stabbed Mervin as the latter was
> pointing a knife at his own neck. In her testimony, she stated that: |
>
> Q: When you tried to open the door, what did Mervin do? |
>
> AS I was carrying my youngest son Cayleb[,] and when I reached the
> [doorknob] to go out, it was then that Mervin [tapped] my hand for. _
> me not to be able to go out of the house, sir.
>
> 6 ‘TSN, Gianne Carla Thanaraj y Gloria, April 18, 2018, pp. 22-25.
> 87 Jd. at 8.
> 68 Jd. at 10-11.
>
> 67
>
>
> Decision : a - 15 Oo GR. No. 262944
>
> Q: Which hand did Mervin use in tapping your hand?
> A: He used his left hand, sir.
> —Q: And which hand of yours did Mervin n tap, right or left?
> A: My left hand, sir.
> Q: After Mervin tapped your hand, what did you do?
> A: This made me step back and it was at that time that I saw Mervin’ S
>
> neck bloodied already, si sir. -
>
> Q: After seeing that there was already blood on Mervin’s neck, what -
> did you do?
>
> At that point[,] we looked at each other and we were both shocked :
> at what just happened, I put down Cayleb and J immediately went
> out of the door of the house, sir. |
>
> a
>
> ‘Why did you go out?
> I asked for help, sir.
>
> When you said humingi ako ng tulong, in what particular way did
> you ask for help? |
>
> I shouted out loud “tulong-tulong[,”] and I saw construction workers
> responding to my call for help and I went back inside the house, sir.
>
> r :
>
> | ‘As seen in her narration, accused- appellant never admitted to , stabbing
> Mervin during her testimony. :
>
> - We reiterate that proof of corpus delictiis indispensable in the
> prosecution. of crimes. Corpus delicti refers to the body or substance of the
> crime, or the fact of its commission and what must be proven is the criminal —
> act and the defendant’s agency in the commission of the act .”°
>
> Yet, aside from proving the elements of parricide, which is a crime mala
> in se, the prosecution is likewise tasked to prove that there is a concurrence
> of actus reus and the mens rea in the commission of the crime.
>
> Actus reus pertains to the external or overt acts or omissions included
> - in a crime’s definition, while mens rea refers to the accused’s guilty state of
> _ mind or criminal intent accompanying the actus reus.||
>
> Here, the prosecution failed to prove mens rea, that is
> accused-appellant’s criminal intent to kill her husband. |
>
> 69 Td. at 15-16.
> 70 Acharon v. People, G.R. No. 224946, November 9, 2021 [Per J. Caguioa, En Banc].
>
> 71 Id.
>
>
> Decision ee 6 G.R. No. 262944
>
> When accused-appellant tried to leave the family home, Mervin was
> already holding a knife to. his neck. Mervin attempted to stop
> accused-appellant by blocking the doorway with his entire body, and threats _
> to kill himself. If at ali, it was Mervin’s intention to kill himself should
> accused-appellant leave their house, while the intention of accused-appellant.
> was to leave their house together with their child. The absence of malice on
> the part of accused- appellant to kill Mervin negates murder.
>
> Notably, Dr. Aguda’ S testimony tended to establish the remote
> possibility that the stab wounds sustained by Mervin were not accidental and
> could not have been self-inflicted. This is because of the forward trajectory of |
> the stab found on Mervin’s neck as opposed to a backward trajectory.
> However, it was not shown how Mervin was holding the knife at the time of
>
> the incident. It bears noting that the trajectory of a wound would have to
>
> depend on how a person is holding a knife. Mervin, being the one threatening
> to kill himself, could have positioned the knife in a manner that would ensure
>
> ~ his own death if only to convince accused-appellant to stay with him. More,
>
> the wounds sustained by Mervin would not really be accidental as he had the
> intention to kill himself, With this: circumstance, it is necessary for the
> prosecution to exclude. any possibility that the killing was done by a person
>
> other than accused-appellant atid the failure to do so, it is the constitutional
>
> presumption of innocence that shall prev ail. As. explained in People v.
>
> Magline inas:'
>
> The judicial determination of guilt or innocence of the person
> ‘necessarily starts with the recognition of his or her constitutional right to be
> presumed innocent of the charge. he or she faces. Apropos is the « case |
> of People we Lumikid, wherein the Court held: 7
>
> | While an accused stands before the court burdened iby a
>
> _ previous preliminary investigation finding that there is
> probable cause to believe that he committed the crime charged,
>
> the judicial determination of his guilt or innocence necessarily,
> starts with the recognition of his constitutional right to be
> presumed innocent of the charge he faces. This principle, a
> right of the accused, is enshrined no less 1 in out Constitution. It
> embodies as well a duty on the part of the court to ascertain
> that no person is made to answer for a crime unless his guilt is
> proven beyond reasonable doubt. Its primary consequence in
> our criminal justice system-.is the. basic rule that the
> prosecution carries the burden of overcoming the presumption
> "through proof of guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
> Thus, a criminal case rises or falls on the strength of the
> | prosecution’ s case, not on the weakness of the defense. Once
> the prosecution overcomes the presumption of mnocence by
> proving the elements of the crime and the identity of the
>
> accused as perpetrator beyond reasonable doubt, the burden of |
> ‘evidence then shifis to the defense which’shall then test the
>
> strength of the prosecution’s case either by showing that no-
> crime was, in fact, committed or that the accused could not
>
> os nn rrr ann -
>
> 2 GR. No. 255496, August 10, 2022 (Per CI. Gesnundo, F First Division].
>
>
> Decision rs ee G.R. No. 262944
>
> have committed or did not commit the imputed crime or, at the
> very least, by casting doubt on the guilt of the accused.
>
> To overcome this constitutional right in favor of the accused, the
> prosecution must hurdle two things: first, the accused enjoys the
> constitutional presumption of innocence until final conviction; conviction
> requires no less than evidence sufficient to arrive at a moral certainty of
> guilt, not only with respect to the existence of a crime, but, more
> importantly, of the identity of the accused as the author of the crime. Second,
>
> ' the prosecution’s case must rise and fall on its own merits and cannot draw
> its strength from the weakness of the defense.
>
> Indeed, a crime is the doing of that which the penal code forbids to
> be done, or omitting to do what it commands. A necessary part of the
> definition of every crime is the designation of the author of the crime upon
> whom the penalty is to be inflicted. An ample proof that a crime has been
> committed has no use if the prosecution is unable to convincingly prove the
> offender’s identity. The constitutional presumption of innocence that an
> accused enjoys is not demolished by an identification that is full of
> uncertainties.’? (Emphasis in the original, citations omitted)
>
> Still, the CA focused greatly on accused-appellant’s statements to
> Jimar, which they held formed part of the res gestae under Rule 130, Section
> 42” of the Rules of Court, and are admissible in evidence against her.
>
> At the level of the CA, Jimar’s testimony regarding accused-appellant’s
> admission to him that she stabbed her husband was offered to establish the
> events leading to Mervin’s death.
>
> However, We do not agree with this characterization. We find that
> -accused-appellant’s statements to Jimar are not covered by res gestae.
>
> Rule 130, Section 36” of the Rules of Court states that a witness can
> only testify to those facts which they know of their personal knowledge, that
> _is, which are derived from their own perception, except as otherwise provided
> in these rules. Hearsay evidence, or those derived outside of a witness’s
> personal knowledge, are generally inadmissible due to serious concerns on
> their trustworthiness and reliability. Such evidence, by their nature, are not
>
> 73 Id. at 8-9. This pinpoint citation refers to the copy of the Decision uploaded to the Supreme Court
> website. .
> 74 RULES OF COURT, Rule 130, sec. 42 states:
> Section 42. Part of res gestae. —- Statements made by a person while a startling occurrence is taking
> _ place or immediately prior or subsequent thereto with respect to the circumstances thereof, may be given
> in evidence as part of the res gestae. So, also, statements accompanying an equivocal act material to the
> issue, and giving it a legal significance may be received as part of the res gestae.
> A declaration is deemed part of the res gestae and is admissible as an exception to the hearsay rule when
> the following requisites are present: (1) the principal act, the res gestae, is a startling occurrence; (2) the
> statements were made before the declarant had time to contrive or devise; and (3) statements must
> . concern the occurrence in question and its immediately attending circumstances.
> 75 RULES OF COURT, Rule 130, sec. 36 states: |
> Section 36. Testimony generally confined to personal knowledge; hearsay excluded. —- A witness can
> testify only to those facts which [they know] of [their] personal knowledge; that is, which are derived
> from [their] own perception, except as otherwise provided in these rules.
>
> g
>
>
> Decision 1 G.R. No. 262944
>
> - given under oath or solemn affirmation and likewise have not undergone the -
> benefit of cross-examination to test the reliability of the out-of-court declarant
> on which the relative weight of the out-of-court statement depends.”
>
> Prior to the Rules of Court and its succeeding amendments in People v.
>
> Toledo,” this Court clarified the nature of the hearsay rule:
>
> We would like finally to turn attention to what was said by
> the editor of L.R.A. in his note in volume 37 hereinbefore referred to, viz.:
>
> The purpose of all evidence is to get at the truth. The
> reason for the hearsay rule is that the extrajudicial and —
> unsworn statement of another is not the best method of serving
> this purpose. In other words, the great possibility of the
> fabrication of falsehoods, and the inability to prove their
> untruth, requires that the doors be closed to such evidence. So
> long therefore as a declarant is available as a witness, [their]
> _ extrajudicial statement should not be heard. Where, however,
> the declarant is dead or has disappeared, [their] previous
> statements out of court, if not inadmissible on other grounds,
> are the best evidence. But they are not rendered inadmissible
> by the mere fact that the declarant is unavailable,—-something
> else is necessary. One fact-which will satisfy this necessity is
> that the declaration is or was against the declarant’ s interest,
> and this is because no sane person will be presumed to tell a
> falsehood to [their] own detriment.’* (Emphasis supplied)
>
> tee
>
> Yet, in order for a.statement to be considered part of res gestae, the
>
> following elements must’ concur: (a) the principal act, the res gestae, 1s a
>
> startling occurrencé; (b) the statement was made before the declarant had time
> to contrive or devise; and (c) the statement concerns the occurrence in
> question and its immediately attending c! circumstances.’ a
>
> In People v. Loma,* this Court cited instances where the res gestae rule
>
> _was applied. Notably, in all of these, the victim of the crime or incident is the
>
> one who testified leading to the rule’s application, thus:
>
> In People v. Villarama, the accused, ‘uncle of the non-testifying
> 4-year-old rape victim, was convicted on the, basis of what she told her
> mother. The Court ruled: .
>
> In the case at bar, there is no doubt that the victim was
> subjected to a: startling occurrence when she pointed to .
> appellant as-her assailant. It is evident from the records that the
>
> statement was spontaneous because the time gap from the
> sexual assault to the time the victim recounted her
>
> %6 People v. XXX, 839 Phil. 252, 265 (2018) [Per J. Caguioa, Second Division].
> 7 51 Phil. 825 (1928) [Per J. Malcolm, By Ban} |
> B® Id. at 838-839.
>
> 79 People v. Calinawan, 805 Phil. 673, 682 (2017) [Fer J. Mendoza, ‘Second Division].
> 80 887 Phil. 117 (2020) [Per J. Gaerian, Third Division}.
>
>
> . Decision 49 | G.R. No. 262944
>
> harrowing experience in the hands of appellant was very short.
> Obviously; there was neither capability nor opportunity for the
> 4-year-old victim to fabricate her statement.
>
> In People v. Lupae, the Court convicted the accused based on the
> 10-year-old victim’s denunciation of her uncle to a neighbor whom she met
> soon after she managed to get away from her uncle after the rape. It was
> held that:
>
> The requisites were met herein. AAA went to Tita
> Terry’s house immediately after fleeing from Lupac and
> spontaneously, unhesitatingly and immediately declared to
> Tita Terry that Lupac had sexually abused her. Such manner
> of denunciation of him as her rapist was confirmed by Tita
> Terry’s testimony about AAA’s panic-stricken demeanor
> that rendered it difficult to quickly comprehend what
> the victim was then saying. Of course, AAA’s use of the
> words hindot and inano ako ni Kuya Ega said enough about
> her being raped.
>
> In People v. Velasquez, the Court also considered as part of the res
> gestae the declarations. of the 2-year-old rape victim to her mother. The
> Court found that the victim’s statement, as well as her acts, constitutes
> the res gestae, as it was. made immediately subsequent to a startling
> occurrence, uttered shortly thereafter by her with spontaneity, without prior
> opportunity to contrive the same. Her mother’s account of her words and
> gestures constitutes independently | relevant statements distinct from hearsay
> and likewise admissible not as to the veracity thereof but to the fact that they
> had been thus uttered.
>
> Here, the declarations of AAA were correctly considered by the trial
> court as part of the res gestae as the same was uttered immediately after the
> rape, an undoubtedly startling event, committed against her by someone she
> considered as family. Also, there is no. question that AAA had no
> opportunity to concoct a story different from. what actually transpired as
>
> -- when she arrived home and immediately declared what accused-appeilant
> did to her, her mother still found blood stains near her anus and in between
> her legs. Verily, all the requisites for a declaration to be considered as part
> of the res gestae were present.®’ (Citations omitted)
>
> In contrast, the case at bar presents a different situation where the
> declarant, the accused-appellant herself, is the assailant, and not the victim.
> More, she took the witness stand and was subjected to cross-examination.
> Thus, the res gestae rule does not apply. :
>
> As accused-appellant actually took the witness stand, her statements
> were subjected to scrutiny as Mervin’s alleged perpetrator. In light of this, her
> statements to Jimar must be examined under either declarations against
>
> interest or admissions against interest.
>
> EA TATE EF
> ee a .
>
> 81 Jd at 130-131.
>
>
> Decision 20 | G.R. No: 262944
>
> In Lazaro v. Agustin,® this Court distinguished the two concepts as
>
> - follows:
>
> Admissions against interest are those made by a party to a litigation or by
> one in privity with or identified in a legal interest with such party, and
> are admissible whether or not the declarant is available as a
>
> - witness. Declaration against interest are those made by a person who is
> neither a party nor in privity with a party to the suit, are secondary evidence
> and constitute an exception to the hearsay rule. They are admissible only
> when the declarant is unavailable as a witness.*’ (Citations omitted)
>
> As accused-appellant herself was available as a witness to testify
> regarding her utterances and actually took said witness stand, her statements
> cannot be classified as a declaration against interest. Thus, they must be
> examined under the rule of admission against interest.
>
> An admission against interest is governed by Rule 130, Section 27 of
> the Rules of Court stating that an act, declaration, or omission of a party as to
>
> a relevant fact may be given ih evidence against him or her.** To be
>
> admissible, an admission must: (a) involve matters of fact, and not of law; (b)
> be categorical and definite; (c) be knowingly and voluntarily made; and (d) be
> adverse to the admitter’s interests, otherwise it would be self-serving and
> inadmissible.* ae
>
> In People v. Catacutan,® this Court held that:
>
> Indeed, the central issue involved under the hearsay rule is the
> trustworthiness and. reliability of hearsay evidence, since the statement
> testified to was not given under oath or solemn affirmation, and more
> compellingly, the declarant was not subjected to cross examination by the
> opposing party to test his or her percéption, memory, veracity and
> articulateness, on whose reliability the entire worth of the out-of-court
> statement depends. However, in admissions against interest, the admission
> is made by. apartyto a litigation. Verily, the rule excluding hearsay
>
> _ testimony, which rests mainly on the ground that there is no opportunity to
> cross-examine the person to whom statements or writings are attributed,
> does not apply.
>
> In People: v. Reyes, the Court ordained that the conversation among _
> the accused, mentioning that they had shot the victims, which was overheard
> by the prosecution witness, is admissible in evidence as an. admission.*’
> (Emphasis suppli ed, citations omitted) » a
>
> 82 632 Phil. 310 (2010) [Per J. Peralta, Third Division].
>
> 83 Jd. at 320.
>
> 8+ 2019 Amendments to the 1989 Revised Rules on Evidence.
>
> 85 Lacbayan v. Samoy, Jr., 661 Phil. 306, 318 (201 1) {Per J. Villarama, Jr., Third Division].
>
> 86 GR. No. 260731, February 13, 2023 [Per J. Lazaro-Javier, Second Division].
>
> 87 Id. at 12. This pinpoint citation refers to the copy of the Decision uploaded to the Supreme Court website.
>
> >
>
>
> Decision 21 G.R. No. 262944
>
> In this case, accused-appellant’s utterances to Jimar that she allegedly
> stabbed Mervin cannot be said to be unequivocal. The circumstances show
> that accused-appellant was in a state of shock and was seeking help so that her
> husband could be taken to a hospital. The previous threats of Mervin to kill
> himself should accused-appellant leave the house left her in a state of mind
> _ that any action on her part to leave the house would lead to his stabbing. As
> she was able to leave the house, she would necessarily blame herself for the
> eventual stabbing of Mervin. The psychological state of accused-appellant at
> the time she made the alleged admissions to Jimar prevents this Court from
> concluding that said statements against her interest were categorical and
> definite.
>
> In addition, We agree with accused-appellant’s argument that the RTC
> erroneously considered William’s testimony. An examination of William’s
> Judicial Affidavit shows that accused-appellant only told William the words
> “kuya, di ko sinasadya.” This Court cannot comprehend this statement to
> mean that accused-appellant was the perpetrator of the crime.
>
> We also note that accused-appellant’ s statements to POI Laleo are
> inadmissible in evidence as her verbal admission that she stabbed her husband
> was elicited during custodial investigation. Article III, Section 12 of the
> - Constitution expressly provides:
>
> Section 12. (1) Any person under investigation for the commission of an
> offense shall have the right to be informed of his right to remain silent and
> to have competent and independent counsel preferably of his own choice. If
> the person cannot afford the services of counsel, he must be provided with
> one. These rights cannot be waived except in writing and in the presence of
> counsel.
>
> (2) No torture, force, violence, threat, intimidation, or any other means
> which vitiate the free will shall be used against him. Secret detention places,
> solitary, incommunicado, or other similar forms of detention are prohibited.
>
> (3) Any confession or admission obtained in violation of this[,] or Section
> 17 hereof shall be inadmissible in evidence against him.
>
> (4) The law shall provide for penal and civil sanctions for violations of this
> section as well as compensation to and rehabilitation of victims of torture or
> ‘similar practices, and their families. (Emphasis supplied)
>
> At the time, accused-appellant was not informed of her rights and the
> same were not validly waived by her. Further, her verbal admission was made
> without assistance from counsel, and was also not reduced into writing.
>
> On its own, the prosecution’s reliance on accused-appellant’s statement
> to Jimar cannot serve as the lone basis of her conviction as it does not
> constitute proof beyond reasonable doubt. More, the knife Mervin was
>
>
> Decision 22 G.R. No. 262944
>
> stabbed with was never subjected to DNA testing by the prosecution.
> Accused-appellant’s children were also never presented to testify, despite one
> of them being a witness to the moment before the stabbing incident.
>
> In People v. Ordiz,® this Court held that:
>
> It is an ancient principle of our penal system that no one shall be
> found guilty of crime except upon proof beyond reasonable doubt. Thus, in
> proving the existence of the aforesaid elements of the crime charged, the
> prosecution has the heavy burden of establishing the same. The prosecution
> must rely on the strength of its own evidence and not on the weakness of the
> defense.®’ (Citation omitted)
>
> Again, the burden to prove Gianne’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt
> rests with the prosecution and this, they failed to do.
>
> Under the equipoise rule, where the evidence in a criminal case is
> evenly balanced, the constitutional presumption of innocence tilts the scales
> in favor of the accused.’ It follows then that if there exists even an iota of
> doubt, this Court is under a.longstanding legal injunction to resolve the doubt
> in favor of the accused.”!
>
> As a final note, in People v. Urzais,” this Court held that:
>
> It is the primordial duty of the prosecution: to present its side with
> clarity and persuasion, so that conviction becomes the only logical and
> inevitable conclusion. What is.required of it is to justify the conviction of
> the accused with moral certainty. Upon the prosecution's failure to meet this
> test, acquittal becomes the constitutional duty of the Court, lest its mind be —
> tortured with the thought that it has imprisoned an innocent man for the rest
> of his life. The constitutional right to be presumed innocent until proven
> guilty can be overthrown only by- proof beyond reasonable doubt.”
> (Emphasis supplied, citations omitted)
>
> Taking these into consideration, accused-appellant must be acquitted.
>
> While this Court condemns the senseless crime, which led to Mervin’s
> death and commiserates with the bereaved family, accused-appellant’s
> acquittal of the crime of parricide does not signify that this Court affirms her
> absolute innocence of the charge, but that the prosecution failed to present
> sufficient amount of evidence to-establish her guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
>
> 88 862 Phil. 614 (2019) [Per J. Caguioa, Second Division].
>
> 89 Id. at 624. Dk
>
> % Lagao v. People, G.R. No. 217721, September 15, 2021 [Per J. Gaerlan, Second Division].
>
> 51 People v. Maglinas, G.R. No. 255496, August 10, 2022 [Per C.J. Gesmundo, First Division] at 20. This
> pinpoint citation refers to the copy of the Decision uploaded to the Supreme Court website.
>
> 9 784 Phil. 561 (2016) [Per J. Perez, Third Division}. |
>
> 3 Id. at S80.
>
>
> Decision OR G.R. No. 262944
>
> ACCORDINGLY, the Appeal is GRANTED. The October 12, 2020
> Decision and May 26, 2022 Resolution of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R.
> CR-HC No. 11732 are REVERSED. Gianne Carla Thanaraj y Gloria is
> ACQUITTED of parricide under Article 246 of the Revised Penal Code. She
> is ORDERED to be IMMEDIATELY RELEASED from detention unless
> she is being held for some other valid or lawful cause.
>
> Let a copy of this Decision be furnished to the Superintendent of the
> Correctional Institution for Women for immediate implementation. The
> Superintendent of the Correctional Institution for Women is DIRECTED to
> REPORT to this Court, within five days from receipt of this Decision, the
> action he/she has taken.
>
> Let an entry of judgment be issued immediately.
>
> | SO ORDERED.
>
> mosttt.ovez
>
> Associate Justice
>
> WE CONCUR:
>
> MARVIC M.V.F. LEONEN
> ve Senior Associate Justice
> With — od D- |
>
> amy €/LA ZARO-JAVIER
> | Associate Justice
>
> ECO 1
>
> Associate Justice
>
> ATTESTATION
>
> I attest that the conclusions in the above Decision had been reached in
> consultation before the case was assigned to the writer of the opinion of this
> Court’s Division.
>
>
> Decision | | 24 G.R. No. 262944
>
> Chairperson, Second Division
>
> CERTIFICATION
>
> Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 13 of the Constitution and the Division
> Chairperson’s Attestation, I certify that the conclusions in the above Decision
> had been reached in consultation before the case was assigned to the writer of
> the opinion of this Court’s Division. |
>
>
> SECOND DIVISION
>
> G.R. No. 262944 (PEOPE OF THE PHILIPPINES, Plaintiff-
> appellee, v. GIANNE CARLA THANARAJ y GLORIA, Accused-
> appellant. )
>
> Promulgated:
>
> CONCURRENCE AND DISSENT
> LAZARO-JAVIER, J.:
>
> In the ponencia, accused-appellant Gianne Carla Thanaraj (Gianne)
> was acquitted of the crime of parricide. Nonetheless, a portion of the ponencia
> ruled that the statements of Gianne to the prosecution witness Jimar C.
> Moranta (Jimar) were not admissible as part of the res gestae as the out-of-
> court declarant Gianne actually took the witness stand and her
> statements were subjected to scrutiny. For context, Gianne appeared to
> have told Jimar right after the stabbing incident “Kuya, mahal na mahal ko po
> ang asawa ko. Hindi ko sinasadya na saksakin siya” (statement).
>
> The ponencia instead ordained that the statement is properly
> characterized as an admission against interest under Rule 130, Section 27 of
> the Rules of Court as Gianne took the witness stand and testified on her
> - statement. According to the ponencia, when the out-of-court statements are
> made by a party to a litigation, and the said party testified in court, the
> statements can only be admissible as an admission against interest. In doing
> so, the. ponencia concluded that the subject statement is inadmissible as an
> admission against interest as it was not categorical and definite.
>
> While I agree that Gianne should be acquitted, I take exception to the
> ponencia’s characterization of her statement. |
>
> Time and again, the Court has ruled that even the out-of-court
> statements of witnesses who testified during trial can be considered as part of
> the res gestae. This was ruled in People v. Lupac,' where the out-of-court
> statements of the victirn herself were considered as part of the res gestae even
> if she likewise testified during the trial, viz.:
>
> Firstly, both the RTC and the CA considered AAA as a credible
> witness. We accord great weight to their assessment of the credibility of
> AAA as a witness as well as of her version. Verily, the personal observation
>
> 1 695 Phil, 505, 511-516 (2012) [Peér.J. Bersamin, First Division].
>
>
> Concurrence and Dissent 2 G.R. No. 262944 .
>
> of AAA’s conduct and demeanor enabled the trial judge to discern if she
> was telling t the truth or inventing it.
>
> The Court holds that AAA’s denunciation of Lupac as her rapist to
> Tita Terry and her own mother with the use of the words hindot and inano
> ako ni Kuya Ega without any appreciable length of time having intervened
> following her discovery of the rape was part of the res gestae (that is, rape).
> Section 42, Rule 130 of the Rules of Court states: |
>
> Section 42. Part of the res gestae. — Statements made by a person
> while a startling occurrence is taking place or immediately prior or
> subsequent thereto with respect to the circumstances thereof, may be given
> in evidence as part of the res gestae.So, also, statements accompanying an
>
> equivocal act material to the issue, and giving it a legal significance, may.
> be received as part of the res gestae.
>
> Similarly, in People v. Paycana, Jr.,’ the Court held that the out-of-
> court statements of a witness who was presented during trial may be
> considered as part of the res gestae. This ruling was made in conjunction with
> admission against interest showing that the Court was cognizant of the
> difference between the two doctrines and still ruled that an out-of-court
> statement by a presented witness may be part of the res gestae, viz.:
>
> In any event, self-defense on the part of appellant is further negated
>
> by the physical evidence in the case. Specifically, the number of wounds,
>
> fourteen (14) in ali, indicates that appellant’s act was no longer an act of
>
> self-defense but a determined effort to kill his victim. The victim died of
> multiple organ failure secondary to multiple stab wounds.
>
> The Court agrees with the trial court’s observation, thus:
>
> Angelina who is 15 years old will not testify against
> her father were it not for the fact that she personally saw her
> father to be the aggressor and stab her mother. Telling her
> grandfather immediately after the incident that accused —.
> stabbed her mother is part of the res gestae hence,
> admissible as evidence. Between the testimony of Angelica
> who - positively identified accused to have initiated the
> stabbing and continuously stabbed her mother and on the
> other hand, the testimony of accused that he killed the victim
> in self-defense, the testimony of the former prevails.
>
> The RTC, as affirmed by the Court of Appeals, properly convicted
> appellant of the complex crime of parricide with unintentional abortion in
> the killing of his seven (7)-month pregnant wife. |
>
> 2 574 Phil. 786, 788-739 (2008) [Per J. Tinga, Second Division].
>
>
> Concurrence and Dissent _ 3 . G.R. No. 262944
>
> Bearing the penalty of reclusion perpetua to death, the crime of
> parricide is committed when: (1) a person is killed; (2) the deceased is killed
> _ by the accused; and (3) the deceased is the father, mother, or child, whether
> legitimate or’ illegitimate, or a legitimate other ascendant or other
> descendant, or the legitimate spouse of the accused. The key element in
> parricide is the relationship of the offender with the victim. In the case. of
> parricide of a spouse, the best proof of the relationship between the accused
> and the deceased would be the marriage certificate. The testimony of the
> accused of being married to the victim, in itself, may also be taken as
> an admission against penal interest.
>
> In this regard, I agree with the findings of the appellate court that the
> statement of Gianne formed part of the res gestae.
>
> O-JAVIER
>
> Associate Justice
