# GR-248680

**Migrante International, Feilza B. Benitez, et al vs. Social Security System represented by Carlos G. Dominguez III, in his capacity as Chairman, Aurora C. Ignacio. et al.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: Migrante International, Feilza B. Benitez, et al vs. Social Security System represented by Carlos G. Dominguez III, in his capacity as Chairman, Aurora C. Ignacio. et al.
- **Ponente**: SINGH, J.
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: November 5, 2024
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/11/248680.pdf)

---

> l\epubltc of tbe tlbiltppines
> $,Upreme QCourt
> ;!ffilanila
> EN BANC
> MIGRANTE G.R. No. 248680
> INTERNATIONAL, FELIZA B.
> BENITEZ, JENNIFER BORBE, Present:
> MARIA LOVINA CASTRO,
> MICHELLE CUSTODIO, GESMUNDO, CJ.,
> ERVIE FUENTES, FATIMA LEONEN,
> MAMPO, ELVIRA MONTERO, CAGUIOA,
> ROSARIO J. V ALDESCO, HERNANDO*
> '
> VERNA VILLANCIO, NERI LAZARO-JAVIER,
> COLMENARES, CARLOS INTING,
> ISAGANI T. ZARATE, ZALAMEDA,
> FERDINAND GAITE, LOPEZ, M.,
> EUFEMIA CULLAMAT, Bayan GAERLAN,**
> Muna Partylist Representatives; ROSARIO,
> ARLENE D. BROSAS, Gabriela LOPEZ, J.,
> Women's Party Representative; DIMAAMPAO,
> FRANCISCA L. CASTRO, ACT MARQUEZ,
> Teachers Party list KHO, JR., and
> Representative; and SARAH SINGH,JJ
> JANE I. ELAGO, Kabataan
> Partylist Representative~ Promulgated:
> Petitioners,
> November 5, 2024
> - versus -
> SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM,
> represented by CARLOS G.
> DOMINGUEZ III, in his capacity
> as Chairman, AURORA C.
> • On Official Business.
> ** On Official Leave.
>
> Decision 2 G.R. No. 248680
> IGNACIO, SSS President and
> Vice-Chairman, DEPARTMENT
> OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS,
> represented by TEODORO
> LOCSIN, JR., in his capacity as
> Secretary, and DEPARTMENT
> OF LABOR AND
> EMPLOYMENT, represented by
> SILVESTRE H. BELLO III, in
> his capacity as Secretary, and
> PHILIPPINE OVERSEAS
> EMPLOYMENT
> ADMINISTRATION,
> represented by its Administrator
> BERNARD OLALIA,
> Respondents.
> x---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------x
> DECISION
> SINGH, J.:
> Before the Court is a Petition for Certiorari and Prohibition I under Rule
> 65 of the Rules of Court filed by petitioners Migrante International, Feliza B.
> Benitez, Jennifer Borbe, Maria Lovina Castro, Michelle Custodio, Ervie
> Fuentes, Fatima Mampo, Elvira Montero, Rosario J. Valdesco, Verna
> Villancio, Neri Colmenares, Carlos Isagani T. Zarate, Ferdinand Gaite,
> Eufemia Cullamat, Bayan Muna Partylist Representatives; Arlene D. Brosas,
> Gabriela Women's Party Representative; Francisca L. Castro, ACT-Teachers
> Partylist Representative; and Sarah Jane I. Elago, Kabataan Partylist
> Representative ( collectively Migrante International et al.). Migrante
> International et al. seek to nullify subsections (a), ( c ), and ( e) of Section 9-B
> of Republic Act No. 111992 or the Social Security Act of 2018 and Rule 14,
> Sections 1, 5, 5.a, 5.b, 6, 7(iii), and 7 (iv) of the Implementing Rules and
> Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act No. 11199, 3 for violating the equal
> protection clause of the Constitution, for being an unjust deprivation of
> property, and for violating the right to travel.4 Migrante International et al.
> also seek to prohibit the respondents from enforcing the aforementioned
> provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR.5
> 1 Rollo, pp. 3-73.
> (2018).
> Rollo, p. 6.
> 4 Id. at 18-19.
> 5 Id. at 6.
>
> Decision 3 G.R. No. 248680
> The Facts
> On February 7, 2019, then President Rodrigo Duterte signed into law
> Republic Act No. 11199,6 otherwise known as the Social Security Act of
> 2018. One of the significant amendments introduced by Republic Act No.
> 11199 is the compulsory coverage by the Social Security System (SSS) of all
> sea-based and land-based Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs). For this
> purpose, land-based OFWs are treated in the same manner as self-employed
> persons. Pertinently, the assailed provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 are
> quoted as follows:
> Section 9-B. Compulsory Coverage of Overseas Filipino Workers
> (OFWs)-
> (a) Coverage in the SSS shall be compulsory upon all sea-based and land
> based OFWs as defined under Republic Act No. 8042, otherwise known as
> the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995, as amended by
> Republic Act No. 10022: Provided, That they are not over [60] years of age.
> All benefit provisions under this Act shall apply to all covered OFWs. The
> benefits include, among others, retirement, death, disability, funeral,
> sickness[,] and maternity.
> (c) Land-based OFWs are compulsory members of the SSS and considered
> in the same manner as self-employed persons under such rules and
> regulations that the Commission shall prescribe.
> (e ) The Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), the Department of Labor and
> Employment (DOLE) and, the SSS shall ensure compulsory coverage of
> OFWs through bilateral social security and labor agreements and other
> measures for enforcement. (Emphasis supplied)
> In accordance with Section 30 of Republic Act No. 11199, the Social
> Security Commission (SSC) promulgated the IRR of Republic Act No. 11199,
> which was published in the Philippine Star on June 2, 2019. Rule 14 of the
> IRR pertains to the compulsory coverage ofOFWs. The challenged provisions
> of Rule 14 are quoted as follows:
> RULE14
> Coverage of Overseas Filipino Workers
> SEC 1. COMPULSORY OFW COVERAGE. -Coverage in the SSS shall be
> compulsory upon all sea-based and land-based OFWs as defined under
> [Republic Act] No. 8042 or the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act
> 6 (2019).
>
> Decision 4 G.R. No. 248680
> of 1995 as amended [by Republic Act No. 10022], provided they are not over
> [60] years of age. [Sec 9-B, (a), 1st par]
> 1. An OFW refers to a person who is to be engaged, is engaged or has
> been engaged in a remunerated activity in a State of which [they are]
> not [citizen] or on-board a vessel navigating the foreign seas other
> than a government ship used for military or noncommercial purposes,
> or on an installation located offshore or on the high seas. A "person
> to be engaged in a remunerated activity" refers to an applicant worker
> who has been promised or assured employment overseas.
> 11. An OFW shall be allowed to register for initial coverage with the SSS
> up to the day of [their] 60th birthday.
> SEC 5. LAND-BASED OFWS. - Land-based OFWs are compulsory
> members of the SSS and are considered in the same manner as self-employed
> persons, until a Bilateral Labor Agreement (BLA) shall have been entered
> into, under the following provisions of the Social Security Act of 2018 and
> such other rules and regulations that the Commission shall prescribe: [Sec 9-
> B, (c)]
> 1. If the land-based OFW realizes no income in any given month, [they]
> shall not be required to pay contributions for that month; [Sec 11-A]
> 11. The contributions of land-based OFWs shall be fixed and determined
> in accordance with the provisions of the Social Security Act of2018;
> [Sec 19-A in relation to Sec 4 (a ) (4 )]
> iii. The monthly earnings declared by a land-based OFW at the time of
> [their] registration with the SSS shall be the basis of [their] initial
> MSC and the corresponding amount of monthly contribution; [Sec 19-
> A, 1st proviso]
> iv. A land-based OFW member shall pay both the employer and the
> employee contributions; and [Sec 19-A, 1st proviso]
> v. The monthly earnings declared by a land-based OFW at the time of
> [their] registration shall remain the basis of [their] MSC unless [t hey
> make] another declaration of [their] monthly earnings, in which case
> such latest declaration becomes the new basis of [their] MSC. [Sec
> 19-A, 2nd paragraph]
> SEC. 5.a. MSC FOR LAND-BASED OFWs. -The minimum MSC for land
> based OFWs shall be [PHP 8,000.00] [SSC Resolution No. 90 dated [January
> 25,] 2017], provided that those who are receiving monthly earnings lower
> than [PHP] 8,000.00 shall pay the contribution based on the said minimum
> MSC. [Sec 4 (a ) (9), 2nd proviso]
> Changes in the MSC of a land-based OFW member shall be in accordance
> with the following policies: [SSC Resolution No. 728 dated [August 20,]
> 2014]
> For the initial contribution payment, [they] shall be allowed to change
> 1.
> [their] MSC to an MSC higher or lower than the one indicate/
>
> Decision 5 G.R. No. 248680
> time of registration, depending on actual deployment and realization
> of earnings abroad without having to present any proof thereof,
> provided that the new MSC is not lower than the prevailing minimum
> MSC for OFWs. Said contribution shall be deemed as the new
> declaration of earnings and shall be the basis in determining
> compliance with the allowable change in succeeding MSC.
> 11. A land-based OFW member who is below [55] years old shall be
> allowed to change [their] MSC without limit in frequency and in
> number of salary brackets in a given calendar year, but in no case shall
> it be lower than the prevailing minimum MSC for OFWs. Submission
> of written request or declaration of earnings is not required.
> iii. A land-based OFW member who is 55 years old and above shall be
> allowed to increase [their] MSC only once in a given calendar year
> and by one [] salary bracket only from the last posted MSC, regardless
> of whether proof of earnings is presented or not, except for the
> following cases whereby ce1iain rules shall apply accordingly:
> a) In case of a change in [their] membership type from
> employed/self-employed/voluntary to OFW-member for the
> first time, [they] shall be allowed to increase [their] MSC
> without limit and without having to present proof of earnings;
> and
> b) In case of a higher maximum MSC under a new applicable
> schedule of contributions, [they] shall be allowed to increase
> [their] MSC up to the new maximum MSC, without having to
> present proof of earnings, provided that [their] last posted
> MSC corresponds to the maximum MSC under the
> immediately preceding schedule of contributions.
> The corresponding MSC of the first contribution in the above cases
> shall be the basis in determining compliance with the allowable
> change in succeeding MSC. No limit shall be imposed in case of
> decrease in MSC, but in no case shall it be lower than the prevailing
> minimum MSC for OFWs.
> iv. An OFW-member may opt to pay [their] monthly contributions in
> advance regardless of the number of months or years. However, [they]
> may be required to settle underpayment/sin the future resulting from
> any policy change affecting the applicable schedule of contributions
> for the advance payments made.
> SEC 5.b. DEADLINE FOR PAYMENT OF LAND-BASED OFWs. - The
> deadline for payment of contributions of land-based OFW members shall be
> as follows: [SSC Resolution No. 728 dated [August 20,] 2014]
> 1. Contributions for the months of January to September of a given
> calendar year may be paid up to December 31 of the same year; and
> 11. Contributions for the months of October to December of a given
> calendar year may be paid up to January 31 of the succeeding year.
> No contribution paid retroactively by a land-based OFW-member
> based on the above deadline shall be used in determining [their]
>
> Decision 6 G.R. No. 248680
> eligibility to any benefit arising from a contingency wherein the date
> of payment is within or after the semester of contingency.
> SEC 6. MANDA TE OF DF A AND DOLE. - The DF A, the DOLE and all its
> agencies involved in deploying OFWs for employment abroad are mandated
> to negotiate BLAs with the OFWs' host countries to ensure that the employers
> of land-based OFWs, similar to the principals of sea-based OFWs, pay the
> required contributions, in which case these land-based OFWs shall no longer
> be considered in the same manner as self-employed persons under the Social
> Security Act of 2018. Instead, they shall be considered as compulsorily
> covered employees with employer and employee shares in contributions that
> shall be provided for in the BLAs and their implementing administrative
> agreements, [Sec 9-B, (d)] provided that in countries which already extend
> social security coverage to OFWs, the DFA through the Philippine Embassies
> and the DOLE shall negotiate further agreements to serve the best interests
> of the OFWs. [Sec 9-B, (d), proviso]
> SEC 7. BILATERAL SOCIAL SECURITY AND LABOR AGREEMENTS
> AND OTHER MEASURES FOR ENFORCEMENT. -The DF A, the DOLE
> and the SSS shall ensure compulsory coverage of OFWs through bilateral
> social security and labor agreements and other measures for enforcement.
> [Sec 9-B, (e)]
> iii. For land-based OFWs in countries without any SSA or BLA with the
> Republic of the Philippines, the measures for enforcement of compulsory
> coverage shall include, among others, the collection of contribution payments
> by the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration (POEA) and/or the
> concerned attached DOLE agencies, through its applicable documentation
> and deployment processes such as the issuance of Overseas Employment
> Certificate (OEC), as follows:
> a) For new hires, direct/name hires and government-to-government hires
> - one [] monthly contribution; and
> b) For re-hires/returning workers/Balik-Manggagawa - three [] monthly
> contributions.
> iv. The DF A, the DOLE and the SSS shall enter into an agreement on the
> implementation of their joint mandate to ensure the compulsory coverage of
> OFWs, covering the following undertakings, among others:
> a) Creation of a Joint Committee to craft the enabling
> issuances/instruments;
> b) Establishment of data linkages and compliance monitoring schemes;
> c) An-angements on OFW member servicing and benefit disbursements,
> including the required documentation for unemployment benefit claims;
> d) Rationalization of SSS representation in Foreign Service Posts; and
> e) Conduct of information campaigns.
> Migrante International et al. filed this Petition before the Court against
> the SSS, the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), the Department of Labor
> and Employment (DOLE), and the Philippine Overseas Employment
>
> Decision 7 G.R. No. 248680
> Administration (POEA) ( collectively DFA et al.), to seek the nullification of
> subsections (a), (c), and (e) of Section 9-B of Republic Act No. 11199 and
> Rule 14, Sections 1, 5, 5-A, 5-B, 6, 7 (iii), and 7 (iv) of its IRR, for being
> unconstitutional. Migrante International et al. also pray to prohibit the
> respondents from enforcing the assailed provisions of Republic Act No. 11199
> and its IRR.
> The Arguments of Migrante International et al.
> Procedural Aspects
> Migrante International et al. assert that they have met the requisites for
> judicial review.7 According to Migrante Inte111ationale t al., there exists an
> actual case or controversy in this case, given the evident clash of the parties'
> respective legal claims.8 Furthennore, Republic Act No. 11199 has already
> been signed by the President and the IRR has been published in a newspaper
> of general circulation. Thus, the threat of injury is not merely speculative or
> hypothetical, but, rather, real and apparent.9
> Migrante International et al. also maintain that they all have legal
> standing to file the Petition as citizens, considering that the issues raised are
> of transcendental importance. 10 Petitioner Migrante International (Migrante)
> asserts its legal standing as an association of Filipino migrants that has
> chapters in 24 countries. 11 Petitioners Feliza B. Benitez, Jennifer Borbe, Maria
> Lovina Castro, Michelle Custodio, Ervie Fuentes, Fatima Mampo, Elvira
> Montero, Rosario J. Valdesco, and Verna Villancio, all land-based OFWs,
> ( collectively petitioners land-based OFW s) argue that they have sufficiently
> shown their standing to file the Petition, as they are in immediate danger of
> sustaining some direct injury because of the enforcement of the assailed law
> and IRR. 12 Migrante International et al., who are legislators, assert legal
> standing based on the alleged infringement of their legislative prerogatives. 13
> Additionally, Migrante International et al. argue that the remedies of
> certiorari and prohibition are proper since the Petition raises constitutional
> issues.14 Further, Migrante International et al. claim that the direct recourse to
> the Court is justified, emphasizing transcendental issues involving pure
> questions of law raised in the Petition. 15
> 7 Id. at 350.
> 8 Id. at 351.
> 9 Id.
> 10 Id. at 11.
> II Id.
> 12 Id. at 354.
> 13 Id. at 355.
> 14 Id. at 356.
> 1s Id.
>
> Decision 8 G.R. No. 248680
> Finally, the respondents DF A, DOLE, and POEA were properly
> impleaded since the Petition is also one for prohibition and they are the
> government agencies mandated to implement the law.16
> Substantive Aspects
> Migrante International et al. argue that Section 9-B, subsections (a), (c),
> and (e) of Republic Act No. 11199 are unconstitutional for violating the equal
> protection clause. 17 They contend that land-based OFWs are not similarly
> situated as local employees on account of the nature of their employment. 18
> Unlike local employees whose employers contribute to SSS, there is no
> similar favorable provision for land-based OFWs.19 Since their employers are
> outside Philippine jurisdiction, the land-based OFWs must pay both employee
> and employer shares. While the assailed law envisions bilateral agreements
> with the host countries of the OFWs to change this, Migrante International et
> al. highlight that this remains uncertain. Meanwhile, land-based OFWs bear
> the burden.20
> Additionally, Migrante International et al. argue that treating land
> based OFWs as self-employed persons lacks reasonable justification. 21
> Furthermore, they question the distinction between land-based and sea-based
> OFWs regarding employer contributions. Sea-based OFWs have manning
> agencies paying for them, while land-based OFW s-even those with agents-
> must cover the entire SSS premium until bilateral agreements are secured.22
> Moreover, Migrante International et al. challenge the compulsory
> contribution mechanism under Rule 14, Section 7(iii) of the IRR. Under this
> provision, land-based OFWs must pay contributions as self-employed before
> leaving the country as a requirement for receiving their overseas employment
> certificate (OEC).23 Migrante International et al. claim that this imposition
> deprives them of property without due process and restricts their right to
> work. 24 Additionally, it is ultra vires on the part of the SSS to enforce
> compulsory coverage of land-based OFWs through the issuance of OECs.25
> Migrante International et al. claim that enforcing SSS coverage via OEC
> issuance is patently oppressive and discriminatory.26
> 16 Id. at 357.
> 17 Id. at 358.
> 18 Id. at 359.
> 19 Id. at 360.
> 20 Id. at 361.
> 21 Id. at 362.
> 22 Id. at 28.
> 23 Id. at 365.
> 24 Id. at 366.
> 2s Id.
> 26 Id. at 367.
>
> Decision 9 G.R. No. 248680
> Finally, Migrante International et al. assert that the issuance of OEC to
> ensure collection of SSS contributions violates the constitutional right to
> travel.27
> The Arguments of DFA et al.
> Procedural Aspects
> On the other hand, DF A et al. posit that the Petition does not satisfy all
> the requirements for the exercise of judicial review.28
> Regarding legal standing, DFA et al. contend that Migrante
> International et al. have not effectively demonstrated direct and personal
> injury resulting from the implementation of the assailed provisions of
> Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR.29 Specifically, the petitioners land-based
> OFWs lack legal standing because they have not proven current deployment
> or employment. Regarding petitioner Migrante, the respondent SSS points out
> that it did not submit any proof to establish its authority to represent its
> °
> members.3 Furthermore, the respondents DF A, POEA, and DOLE argue that
> Migrante has also failed to demonstrate how its existence or its purpose as an
> association will suffer or be injured as a result of the enactment of the assailed
> provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR.31 The respondents SSS,
> DF A, and DOLE also contend that the argument of Migrante International et
> al., who are legislators, that the assailed provisions of the IRR infringe on their
> legislative prerogatives, lacks legal basis.32 DFA et al. also dispute Migrante
> International et al. 's claim that the issues raised in the Petition are of
> transcendental importance. 33
> DF A et al. argue that the Petition does not pose an actual and justiciable
> controversy.34 The respondent SSS emphasized that Migrante International et
> al. failed to show that there is an actual injury committed against OFWs
> because of the enactment of the assailed provisions of Republic Act No. 11199
> and its IRR. 35 Further, respondents DF A, DOLE, and POEA stressed that
> Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR would have no real effect on the OFWs
> unless the instrumentalities of the government with jurisdiction over OFW
> deployment - particularly the DOLE and the POEA-promulgate rules and
> regulations or perform acts in furtherance of the provisions. 36 The Petition
> 27 Id. at 369.
> 28 Id. at 393; 443.
> 29 Id. at 395.
> 30 Id. at 397.
> 31 Id. at 447.
> 32 Id. at 449.
> 33 Id. at 398; 449.
> 34 Id. at 400; 443.
> 35 Id. at 403.
> 36 Id. at 445.
>
> Decision G.R. No. 248680
> failed to show an instance where the POEA denied the issuance of an OEC to
> an OFW for failure to pay SSS contributions.37
> Moreover, the respondents DF A, DOLE, and POEA argue that a
> petition for certiorari and prohibition is not a remedy available to Migrante
> International et al. to question the wisdom of a declared state policy requiring
> compulsory coverage in the SSS.38 The manner in which OFWs are to be
> covered by the SSS is a prerogative exclusively vested in the legislature.39
> This policy matter was determined by the Congress during the enactment of
> Republic Act No. 11199. Although the choice made by the Congress may be
> perceived as erroneous, the appropriate remedy is to seek the amendment or
> repeal of the statute through legislative channels.40
> Similarly, DF A et al. claim that Migrante International et al. erred by
> directly filing the Petition before the Court without exhausting other available
> remedies.41 They could have filed an ordinary action before the Regional Trial
> Court (RTC) or filed a petition for declaratory relief. 42 Furthermore, they
> failed to adhere to the doctrine of hierarchy of courts, bypassing lower courts
> without compelling reasons.43
> Additionally, the respondents DF A, DOLE, and POEA argue that
> Migrante International et al. erred in impleading them as respondents.44 The
> Petition failed to specify acts committed by the DF A, DOLE and POEA
> amounting to grave abuse of discretion. These government agencies did not
> promulgate rules or regulations or perform acts related to the assailed
> provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR. 45 Respondents DF A,
> DOLE, and POEA point out that notably absent from the Petition are the
> House of Representatives and the Senate, despite their role in enacting the
> law-a procedural oversight given their status as indispensable parties.46
> Substantive Aspects
> The respondent SSS emphasized that Republic Act No. 11199 and its
> IRR are presumed constitutional, unless proven otherwise.47
> 31 Id.
> 38 Id. at 452.
> 39 Id. at 454.
> 40 Id.
> 41 Id.
> 42 Id. at 455.
> 43 Id. at 404; 457.
> 44 Id. at 463.
> 45 Id.
> 46 Id. 463-464.
> 47 Id. at 407.
>
> Decision 11 G.R. No. 248680
> DF A et al. dispute Migrante International et al.' s claim that there is a
> violation of the equal protection clause. 48 Land-based OFWs, like other
> employees, must be afforded social protection; thus, the requirement for
> compulsory coverage.49 However, considering the jurisdictional impediment
> regarding the foreign employers of land-based OFW s, there is necessarily a
> different treatment as to the payment of their contribution. 50 Like self
> employed persons, no employer may be compelled to pay the employer's
> share for the land-based OFWs. Thus, according to the respondents, land
> based OFW s and self-employed persons are similarly situated. 51
> Additionally, the respondents DFA, DOLE, and POEA point out that
> the difference in the treatment of land-based and sea-based OFWs rests on a
> substantial distinction that is germane to the purpose of the law. 52 Sea-based
> OFW s' principal employers are bound by standard contracts and international
> conventions, making them liable for SSS contributions.53 Manning agencies,
> acting as employers for sea-based OFWs, share this liability.54 However, no
> similar legal or contractual provision requires foreign employers of land
> based OFWs to contribute to the SSS.55
> Furthermore, respondents DF A, DOLE, and POEA added that the
> compulsory collection of SSS contributions from land-based OFWs does not
> constitute deprivation of property.56 This imposition is reasonably necessary
> to enforce the constitutional mandate of promoting social justice under
> Republic Act No. 11199, as well as in the exercise of the police power of the
> State.57 It ensures the existence of SSS benefits that covered OFWs will enjoy
> during times of need. SSS contributions are not a burden, but serve as
> preparation and protection against possible unforeseen circumstances. 58 As to
> the use of the OEC to ensure collection of the SSS contributions, respondent
> SSS argue that this is a legal compulsion in the exercise of the police power
> of the State. 59
> Finally, Migrante International et al. argue that the requirements for
> issuance of OEC, which include payment of SSS premiums, does not violate
> the right to travel.60 Respondent SSS points out that these requirements do not
> curtail the right to travel considering the highly regulatory nature of overseas
> 48 id. at 407; 465.
> 49 id. at 408.
> 50 id. at 467-468.
> 51 Id. at 409,469.
> 52 id. at 471.
> 53 id. at471-472.
> 54 Id. at410;472.
> 55 Id. at 472.
> 56 Id. at 474.
> 57 Id. at 475.
> 58 Id. at 4 78.
> 59 ld.at418.
> 60 Id. at 420; 479.
>
> Decision 12 G.R. No. 248680
> employment. 61 In this regard, respondents DF A, DOLE, and POEA added that
> the State can validly impose various procedures and requirements before an
> OFW can be deployed for work abroad.62
> The Issues
> This Court resolves the following issues:
> The Procedural Issues
> I. Whether a petition for certiorari and prohibition is the correct
> remedy in assailing the provisions of Republic Act No. 11199
> and its IRR.
> II. Whether the direct resort to the Court is justified.
> III. Whether the Petition satisfy all the requisites for judicial review.
> The Substantive Issues
> I. Whether subsections (a), (c) and (e) of Section 9-B of Republic
> Act No. 11199 and Sections 1, 5, 5-A, 5-B, 6, 7 (iii) and (iv) of
> the IRR, violate the equal protection clause of the Constitution.
> II. Whether the compulsory collection of contribution mechanism
> under Rule 14, Section 7(iii) of the IRR a valid exercise of the
> State's police power.
> III. Whether Rule 14, Section 7(iii) of the IRR violate the right to
> travel.
> The Ruling of the Court
> The Procedural Issues
> Propriety of a Petition for Review on
> Certiorari and Prohibition
> Migrante International et al. seek to declare as unconstitutional certain
> provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR. For this purpose, they
> availed of the remedy of certiorari and prohibition under Rule 65 of the Rules
> of Court. On the other hand, DF A et al. argue that a petition for certiorari and
> prohibition is not a remedy available to question the wisdom of a declared
> State policy requiring the compulsory coverage of OFWs in the SSS.
> 61 Id. at 420.
> 62 Id. at 484.
>
> Decision 13 G.R. No. 248680
> Under Article VIII, Section 1 of the Constitution, judicial power
> includes the duty of the courts of justice not only "to settle actual controversies
> involving rights which are legally demandable and enforceable," but also "to
> determine whether or not there has been a grave abuse of discretion amounting
> to lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part of any branch or instrumentality
> of the Government." The Court's expanded power of judicial review
> provides:
> Section 1. The judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme Court
> and in such lower courts as may be established by law. Judicial power
> includes the duty of the courts of justice to settle actual controversies
> involving rights which are legally demandable and enforceable, and to
> determine whether or not there has been a grave abuse of discretion
> amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part of any branch or
> instrumentality of the Government.
> In Francisco v. The House of Representatives, 63 the Court recognized
> that this expanded jurisdiction was meant "to ensure the potency of the power
> of judicial review to curb grave abuse of discretion by 'any branch or
> instrumentality of government. "'64
> As early as in Tanada v. Angara,65 the Court has held that certiorari
> and prohibition are appropriate remedies to raise constitutional issues and to
> review, prohibit, or nullify, when proper, acts of legislative and executive
> officials.
> This principle has been consistently invoked by the Court in cases
> where the Court's expanded judicial power was invoked to question the
> constitutionality of legislative and executive acts.
> In Magallona v. Ermita,66 the Court allowed the resort to certiorari and
> prohibition to assail the constitutionality of Republic Act No. 9522, which
> adjusted the country's archipelagic baselines and classified the baseline
> regime of nearby territories.
> In Belgica, et.al. v. Hon. Exec. Sec. Ochoa, Jr., et al., 67 the Court
> affirmed that the special civil actions of certiorari and prohibition are proper
> remedial vehicles to test the constitutionality of the Pork Barrel System.
> 63 460 Phil. 830 (2003) [Per J. Carpio Morales, En Banc].
> 64 Id. at 883.
> 65 338 Phil. 546,575 (1997) [Per J. Panganiban, First Division].
> 66 671 Phil. 243 (201 1) [Per J. Carpio, En Banc].
> 67 721 Phil. 416 (2013) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
>
> Decision 14 G.R. No. 248680
> InAraullo v. Aquino,68 the Court clarified that the remedies of certiorari
> and prohibition are broader in scope and reach, and affirmed that these are
> appropriate remedies to assail the constitutionality of the Disbursement
> Acceleration Program (DAP) of the executive and all other issuances
> implementing the DAP.
> In Samahan ng mga Progresibong Kabataan v. Quezon City, 69 the
> Court held as proper the remedies of the writs of certiorari and prohibition to
> assail the constitutionality of curfew ordinances.
> In Private Hospitals Association of the Philippines, Inc. v. Medialdea,70
> the Court ruled that the remedies of certiorari and prohibition under Rule 65
> of the Rules of Court were correctly availed of to assail the constitutionality
> of Republic Act No. 10932 and enjoin its enforcement, notwithstanding that
> these governmental actions do not involve the exercise of judicial, quasi
> judicial or ministerial functions.
> In ACT Teachers Rep. Antonio Tinio v. Duterte, 71 the Court took
> cognizance of a petition for certiorari and prohibition to question the
> constitutionality of Republic Act No. 10963, or the Tax Reform for
> Acceleration and Inclusion (TRAIN) Act.
> In the recent case of Bayyo Association, Inc. v. Tugade, 72 the Court
> reiterated that a petition for certiorari and prohibition is a proper remedy in
> assailing the constitutionality of paragraph 5.2 of Department Order No.
> 2017-011 issued by the Department of Transportation.
> Following this trend in jurisprudence and considering that the present
> Petition assails the constitutionality of Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR,
> Migrante International et al. correctly availed of the special civil action of
> certiorari and prohibition.
> Direct resort to the Court is justified
> DF A et al. claim that Migrante International et al. violated the doctrine
> of hierarchy of courts when it directly filed the Petition before the Court. 73
> Migrante International et al. counter that the direct recourse to the Court is
> 68 752 Phil. 716 (2015) [Per J. Bersamin, En Banc].
> 69 815 Phil. I 067 (20 I 7) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
> 70 842 Phil. 747 (2018) [Per J. Tijam, En Banc].
> 71 G.R. Nos. 236118 and 236925, January 24, 2023 [Per J. Dimaampao, En Banc] at 12. This pinpoint
> citation refers to the Copy of the Decision uploaded to the Supreme Court website.
> 72 G.R. No. 254001, July 11, 2023 [Per J. Singh, En Banc] at 9. This pinpoint citation refers to the Copy
> of the Decision uploaded to the Supreme Court website.
> 73 Rollo, p. 404.
>
> Decision 15 G.R. No. 248680
> justified considering that the Petition raises transcendental issues involving
> questions of law. 74
> The doctrine of hierarchy of courts dictates that, as a rule, petitions for
> the issuance of extraordinary writs should first be made with the lower-ranked
> court exercising concurrent jurisdiction with a higher court. 75
> Nonetheless, the Court has recognized several exceptions to the rule on
> hierarchy of courts. In The Diocese of Bacolod v. COMELEC, 76 the Court
> enumerated instances where direct resort to the Court is allowed:
> 1. when there are genuine issues of constitutionality that must be
> addressed at the most immediate time;
> 2. when the issues involved are of transcendental importance;
> 3. in cases of first impression;
> 4. the constitutional issues raised are better decided by the Supreme Court;
> 5. the time element or exigency in certain situations;
> 6. the filed petition reviews an act of a constitutional organ;
> 7. when there is no other plain, speedy, and adequate remedy in the
> ordinary course of law;
> 8. the petition includes questions that are dictated by public welfare and
> the advancement of public policy, or demanded by the broader interest
> of justice, or the orders complained of were found to be patent nullities,
> or the appeal was considered as clearly an inappropriate remedy. 77
> To justify a direct resort to this Court, the parties must clearly and
> specifically allege in their petitions the special and important reasons therefor.
> More importantly, the Court emphasized in GIOS-SAMAR, Inc. v. Department
> of Transportation and Communications, 78 that to invoke this Court's original
> jurisdiction, only questions of law must be involved. This Court is not a trier
> of facts; it is not equipped to receive and evaluate evidence in the first
> instance.
> The Court notes that this is not the first time that a petition assailing the
> constitutionality of Section 9-B of Republic Act No. 11199 was filed before
> this Court. In Joint Ship Manning Group, Inc. v. Social Security System,79 the
> Court took cognizance of a petition for certiorari and prohibition filed by
> manning agencies seeking to annul and declare as unconstitutional Section 9-
> B of Republic Act No. 11199 for an alleged violation of their constitutionally
> guaranteed rights to due process and equal protection. The Court justified the
> direct resort to the Court because of the existence of two of the exceptions,
> 74 Id. at 357.
> 75 Private Hospitals Association of the Philippines, Inc. v. Medialdea, 842 Phil. 747, 779-780 (2018) [Per
> J. Tijam, En Banc].
> 76 751 Phil. 301 (2015) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
> 77 Id. at 331-335.
> 78 849 Phil. 120 (2019) [Per J. Jardeleza, En Banc].
> 79 876 Phil. 596,615-616 (2020) [Per J. Gesmundo, En Banc].
>
> Decision 16 G.R. No. 248680
> particularly: (1) that this case is of first impression; and (2) that the present
> issue involves public welfare and the advancement of public policy or
> demanded by the broader interest of justice. The Court explained that the
> assailed law pertains to the welfare ofOFWs, who are considered modem-day
> Filipino heroes, and the grant of social protection in their favor. Additionally,
> the Court observed that, for the first time, the social security membership and
> contributions, particularly of our seafarers, are mandated by law.
> Consequently, the Court deemed it necessary to discuss the substantive aspect
> of the issues involved in that case.
> In this case, the law assailed is likewise Republic Act No. 11199.
> Unlike Joint Ship Manning, however, the assailed provisions in this case
> pertain to land-based OFWs. Nevertheless, the Court also finds it imperative
> to ensure that the mandatory social security coverage of land-based OFWs
> adheres to constitutional parameters. Further, the question of whether the
> assailed provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR violate the
> Constitution not only presents a genuine issue of constitutionality, but also
> involves a question of law. Thus, the direct resort to the Court is justified.
> Requisites for Judicial Review
> Notwithstanding the propriety of the legal vehicle employed, the
> requirements for the exercise of the Court's judicial review, even under its
> expanded jurisdiction, must nevertheless be satisfied, namely:
> ( 1) an actual case or controversy calling for the exercise of judicial
> power;
> (2) the person challenging the act must have 'standing' to challenge; he
> or she must have a personal and substantial interest in the case such that
> he or she has sustained, or will sustain, direct injury as a result of this
> enforcement;
> (3) the question on constitutionality must be raised at the earliest
> possible opportunity; and
> ( 4) the issue of constitutionality must be the very lis mota of the case.
> Actual Case or Controversy
> Of utmost importance among the requirements for justiciability is the
> existence of an actual case or controversy. In Kilusang Mayo Uno, et al. v.
> Aquino IIJ,80 the Court discussed the concept of actual case or controversy:
> There is an actual case or controversy if there is a "conflict of legal
> right, an opposite legal claims susceptible of judicial resolution." A
> 80 850 Phil. 1168 (2019) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
>
> Decision 17 G.R. No. 248680
> petitioner bringing a case before this Court must establish that there is a
> legally demandable and enforceable right under the Constitution. There
> must be a real and substantial controversy, with definite and concrete issues
> involving the legal relations of the parties, and admitting of specific relief
> 81
> that courts can grant.
> In Information Technology Foundation of the Philippines v.
> COMELEC, 82 the Court elaborated on the requirement of actual case and
> controversy:
> In other words, the pleadings must show an active antagonistic assertion of
> a legal right, on the one hand, and a denial thereof on the other; that is, it
> must concern a real and not a merely a theoretical question or issue. There
> ought to be an actual and substantial controversy admitting of specific relief
> through a decree conclusive in nature, as distinguished from an opinion
> advising what the law would be upon a hypothetical state of facts. 83
> There is also an actual case or controversy when there is a clear and
> convincing showing of contrariety oflegal rights. In Atty. Calleja v. Executive
> Secretary Medialdea, 84 the Court explained what contrariety of legal rights is:
> An actual case or controversy exists when there is a conflict of legal
> rights, an assertion of opposite legal claims, susceptible of judicial
> resolution as distinguished from a hypothetical or abstract dffference or
> dispute. The issues presented must be definite and concrete, touching on the
> legal relations of parties having adverse interests. There must be
> a contrariety of legal rights that can be interpreted and enforced on the
> basis of existing law and jurisprudence. Corollary thereto, the case must not
> be moot or academic, or based on extra-legal or other similar considerations
> not cognizable by a court of justice. All these are in line with the well-settled
> rule that this Court does not issue advisory opinions, nor does it resolve
> mere academic questions, abstract quandaries, hypothetical or feigned
> problems, or mental exercises, no matter how challenging or interesting
> they may be. Instead, case law requires that there is ample showing of prima
> facie grave abuse of discretion in the assailed governmental act in the
> context of actual, not merely theoretical, facts. 85 (Emphasis supplied,
> citations omitted)
> In Executive Secretary v. Filipinas Shell Petroleum Corp.,86 the Court
> reiterated this pronouncement and further clarified how contrariety of rights
> may be established:
> 81 Id. at 1188.
> 82 499 Phil. 281 (2005) [Per C.J. Panganiban, En Banc].
> 83 Id. at 305.
> 84 918-8 Phil. 1 (2021) [Per J. Carandang, En Banc].
> 85 Id. at 55-56.
> 86 G.R. No. 209216, February 21, 2023 [Per SAJ. Leonen, En Banc].
>
> Decision 18 G.R. No. 248680
> Thus, in asserting a contrariety of legal rights, merely alleging an
> incongruence of rights between the parties is not enough. The party availing
> of the remedy must demonstrate that the law is so contrary to their rights
> that there is no interpretation other than that there is a factual breach of
> rights. No demonstrable contrariety of legal rights exists when there are
> possible ways to interpret the provision of a statute, regulation, or
> ordinance that will save its constitutionality. In other words, the party must
> show that the only possible way to interpret the provision is one that is
> unconstitutional. Moreover, the party must show that the case cannot be
> legally settled until the constitutional issue is resolved, that is, that it is the
> very !is mota of the case, and therefore, ripe for adjudication. 87 (Emphasis
> supplied, citation omitted)
> In Belgica v. Ochoa, 88 the Court found the existence of an actual and
> justiciable controversy because the parties' opposing legal claims regarding
> the constitutionality of the pork baiTel system, satisfied the requirement of
> contrariety of legal rights. 89
> In Universal Robina C01poration v. Department of Trade and
> Industry,90 the Court found a clear and convincing presence of contrariety of
> legal rights between respondent Department of Trade and Industry, which
> maintained its authority when profiteering occurred, and the petitioner, which
> maintained that the provision on profiteering is void for vagueness.
> In Octaviano v. Board of Architecture of the Professional Regulation
> Commission,91 the Court found that the requirement of contrariety of legal
> rights is satisfied considering the parties' adverse and antagonistic positions
> on the constitutionality and validity of the assailed resolutions.
> Closely related to the requisite of actual case or controversy is that the
> question must be ripe for adjudication. A question is considered ripe for
> adjudication when the act being challenged has had a direct adverse effect on
> the individual challenging it. 92 In Atty. Lozano v. Speaker Nograles, 93 the
> Court declared that whether a case is ripe for adjudication is determined by an
> evaluation of two aspects: "first, the fitness of the issues for judicial decision;
> and second, the hardship to the parties entailed by withholding court
> consideration. "94
> 87 Id. at 21-22. This pinpoint citation refers to the copy of the Decision uploaded to the Supreme Court
> website.
> 88 721 Phil. 416 (2013) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
> 89 Id. at 520.
> 90 G.R. No. 203353, February 14, 2023 [Per J. Leonen, En Banc] at 13. This pinpoint citation refers to the
> Copy of the Decision uploaded to the Supreme Court website.
> 91 G.R. No. 239350, August 22, 2023 [Per J. Leon en, En Banc] at 12. This pinpoint citation refers to the
> Copy of the Decision uploaded to the Supreme Court website.
> 92 integrated Bar of the Philippines v. Zamora, 392 Phil. 618, 632-633 (2000) [Per J. Kapunan, En Banc].
> 93 607 Phil. 334 (2009) [Per C.J. Puno, En Banc].
> 94 Id. at 341.
>
> Decision 19 G.R. No. 248680
> Applying these precepts, the Court finds that there exists an actual and
> justiciable controversy in this case considering the evident clash of the parties'
> legal claims, particularly on whether the assailed provisions of Republic Act
> No. 11199 and its IRR violate the land-based OFW's constitutional rights.
> Further, the Court notes that Republic Act No. 11199 has been in force for the
> last five years. The contested provisions, should they be deemed
> unconstitutional, have already affected land-based OFWs.
> Locus s tandi
> In the case of Anak Mindanao Party List Group v. Exec. Sec. Ermita,95
> the Court discussed the concept of "locus standi" or legal standing:
> Locus standi or legal standing has been defined as a personal and
> substantial interest in a case such that the party has sustained or will sustain
> direct injury as a result of the governmental act that is being challenged. The
> gist of the question on standing is whether a party alleges such personal
> stake in the outcome of the controversy as to assure that concrete
> adverseness which sharpens the presentation of issues upon which the court
> depends for illumination of difficult constitutional questions.96
> It has been held that a party who assails the constitutionality of a
> statute must have a direct and personal interest. It must show not only that
> the law or any governmental act is invalid, but also that it sustained or is in
> immediate danger of sustaining some direct injury as a result of its
> enforcement, and not merely that it suffers thereby in some indefinite way.
> It must show that it has been or is about to be denied some right or privilege
> to which it is lawfully entitled or that it is about to be subjected to some
> burdens or penalties by reason of the statute or act complained of. 97
> For a concerned party to be allowed to raise a constitutional
> question, it must show that: (1) it has personally suffered some actual or
> threatened injury as a result of the allegedly illegal conduct of the
> government; (2) the injury is fairly traceable to the challenged action; and
> (3) the injury is likely to be redressed by a favorable action.98
> The legal standing doctrine, however, admits of exceptions. This Court
> has taken cognizance of petitions filed by those lacking personal or substantial
> interest in the challenged governmental act, yet whose petitions raise
> "constitutional issue[s] of critical significance." 99 In Funa v. Villar, 100 the
> 95 558 Phil. 338 (2007) [Per J. Carpio-Morales, En Banc].
> 96 Id. at 350.
> 97 Id. at 351.
> Id.
> 9s
> 99 Funa v. Villar, 686 Phil 571,585 (2012) [Per J. Velasco, Jr., En Banc].
> 100 686 Phil. 571 (2012) [Per J. Velasco, Jr., En Banc].
>
> Decision 20 G.R. No. 248680
> Court summarized the requirements for granting legal standing to "non
> traditional suitors:" 101
> 1.) For taxpayers, there must be a claim of illegal disbursement of public
> funds or that the tax measure is unconstitutional;
> 2.) For voters, there must be a showing of obvious interest in the validity of
> the election law in question;
> 3.) For concerned citizens, there must be a showing that the issues raised
> are of transcendental importance which must be settled early; and
> 4.) For legislators, there must be a claim that the official action complained
> of infringes their prerogatives as 1egislators.102
> Nonetheless, the Court emphasized in Falcis v. Civil Registrar
> General, 103 that even for exceptional suers, the party must claim some kind of
> injury-in-fact:
> For concerned citizens, it is an allegation that the continuing
> enforcement of a law or any government act has denied the party some right
> or privilege to which they are entitled, or that the party will be subjected to
> some burden or penalty because of the law or act being complained of. For
> taxpayers, they must show "sufficient interest in preventing the illegal
> expenditure of money raised by taxation[.]" Legislators, meanwhile, must
> show that some government act infringes on the prerogatives of their office.
> Third-party suits must likewise be brought by litigants who have
> "sufficiently concrete interest" in the outcome of the dispute.104
> In this case, petlt10ner Migrante asserts its legal standing as an
> association of Filipino migrants that has chapters in 24 countries.
> The Court has previously allowed associations to sue on behalf of their
> members.
> In The Executive Secretary v. The Hon. Court of Appeals, 105 the Asian
> Recruitment Council Philippine Chapter, Inc. filed a petition for declaratory
> relief before the Court seeking to declare certain provisions of Republic Act
> No. 8042106 or the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995
> unconstitutional. The association sued on behalf of its members who were
> recruitment agencies. The Court took cognizance of the association's petition
> and said that an association "is but the medium through which its individual
> members seek to make more effective the expression of their voices and the
> redress of their grievances." 107 The Court found that the board resolutions of
> 101 Id. at 585-586.
> 102 Id.
> 103 861 Phil. 388(2019) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
> 104 Id. at 533.
> 105 473 Phil. 27 (2004) [Per J. Callejo, Sr., Second Division].
> 106 ( 1995).
> 107 473 Phil. 27, 51 (2004) [Per J. Callejo, Sr., Second Division].
>
> Decision 21 G.R. No. 248680
> the individual members of the Asian Recruitment Council Philippine Chapter,
> Inc. attached to the petition, were enough proof that the individual members
> authorized the association to sue on their behalf.
> In Pharmaceutical and Health Care Association of the Philippines v.
> Duque III, 108 the Court allowed the Pharmaceutical and Health Care
> Association of the Philippines to sue on behalf of its members to question the
> constitutionality of the rules implementing the ~.1ilk Code. The Court
> considered the amended articles of incorporation of the association and found
> that it was formed "to represent directly or through approved representatives
> the pharmaceutical and health care industry before the Philippine Government
> and any of its agencies, the medical professions and the general public.109
> Citing the case of Executive Secretary v. Court of Appeals, 110 the Court
> declared that "the modem view is that an association has standing to complain
> of injuries to its members." 111
> In Holy Spirit Homeowners Association, Inc. v. Defensor, 112 the
> Holy Spirit Homeowners Association, Inc. filed a petition for prohibition,
> praying that this Court enjoin the National Government Center Administration
> Committee from enforcing the rules implementing RA No. 9207. The Court
> declared that the Holy Spirit Homeowners Association, Inc. "ha[ d] the legal
> standing to institute the [petition for prohibition] whether or not it is the duly
> recognized association of homeowners in the [National Government
> Center]." 113 The Court noted that the individual members of the association
> were residents of the National Government Center. Therefore, "they are
> covered and stand to be either benefited or injured by the enforcement of the
> [implementing rules], particularly as regards the selection process of
> beneficiaries and lot allocation to qualified beneficiaries." 114
> Notably, in these cases, the Court found that the assoc1at10ns
> established who their members were, their authority to sue on behalf of their
> members, and that the members would be directly injured by the challenged
> governmental acts.
> On the contrary, in Provincial Bus Operators Association of the Phils.
> v. DOLE, 115 the Court found that the Provincial Bus Operators Association of
> the Philippines failed to establish who their members were and if these
> members allowed them to sue on their behalf. The Court noted that the
> association did not present any proof, such as board resolutions of their
> 108 561 Phil. 386 (2007) [Per J. Austria-Martinez, En Banc].
> 109 Id. at 396.
> 110 473 Phil. 27 (2004) [Per J. Callejo, Sr., Second Division].
> 111 Id. at 50.
> 112 529 Phil. 573 (2006) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc].
> 113 Id. at 584.
> 114 Id.
> 115 836 Phil. 205 (2018) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
>
> Decision 22 G.R. No. 248680
> alleged members or their own articles of incorporation, authorizing them to
> act as their members' representatives in suits involving their members'
> individual rights. 116
> Similarly, in Bayyo, the Court dismissed a petition for certiorari and
> prohibition filed before the Court to seek the nullification of paragraph 5 .2 of
> Department Order No. 2017-011 issued by the Department of Transportation,
> due to the petitioners' lack of legal standing. The Court noted that Bayyo
> Association Inc. merely submitted its SEC Certificate of Registration. The
> Court found this insufficient to establish that it is a legitimate association of
> PUJ operators and drivers. Further, Bayyo Association Inc. also failed to
> establish who its members were and whether it has been duly authorized by
> said members to institute the case.
> In this case, Migrante submitted its Certificate of Incorporation,
> Articles of Incorporation, and By-Laws. However, an examination of these
> documents would show that these do not establish who the members of
> Migrante are. Further, Migrante failed to submit any proof of its authority to
> institute the case on behalf of the migrant workers it purportedly represents.
> Thus, Migrante has no standing to sue as an association on behalf of its
> members.
> As to the pet1t10ners who are land-based OFWs, respondent SSS
> correctly observed that they failed to clearly state if they are currently
> deployed or employed as OFW s since the OECs they submitted were
> processed years before the assailed law took effect. 117 Further, the Court
> agrees with the respondents that they failed to establish that they sustained
> any injury or are in imminent danger of sustaining some direct injury as a
> result of the promulgation of the assailed provisions of Republic Act No.
> 11199 and its IRR. Hence, the petitioners land-based OFWs have not
> established their legal standing either.
> Regarding petitioners who are legislators, they claim that they have
> established their legal standing. According to them, the assailed provisions of
> the IRR are ultra vires and infringe on their legislative prerogatives.
> The Court agrees.
> When the implementing rules and regulations issued by the Executive
> contradict or add to what Congress has provided by legislation, the issuance
> of these rules amounts to an undue exercise of legislative power and an
> encroachment of Congress' prerogatives. 118 Consequently, the allegation in
> 116 /d.at257.
> 117 Rollo, p. 395
> 118 Purisima v. Lazatin, 801 Phil. 395,413 (2016) [Per J. Brion, En Banc].
>
> Decision 23 G.R. No. 248680
> the Petition that the assailed provisions of the IRR directly contravenes the
> provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 grants a member of Congress legal
> standing to challenge the issuance to prevent undue encroachment of
> legislative power by the executive. 119
> Nonetheless, in this case, all the petitioners invoke one of the
> exceptions to the rule on legal standing: they are filing this Petition as
> concerned citizens, raising issues of transcendental importance. 120
> To be clear, the mere invocation of the alleged transcendental
> importance of the issues raised is not enough to automatically clothe the
> petitioners with legal standing.
> As previously discussed, there exists an actual case or controversy
> before the Court. To reiterate the Court's ruling in Joint Ship Manning Group,
> Inc. et al. v. Social Security System, et al. , 121 Republic Act No. 11199
> concerns the grant of social protection in favor of OFWs. This law, which has
> been effective since 2019, mandates the social security membership and
> contributions of OFW s for the first time. By addressing the issues related to
> compulsory coverage in the SSS of land-based OFWs, the Court can ensure
> that this social security protection operates in their favor. Hailed as modem
> day heroes for their significant contributions to the Philippine economy,
> resolving the constitutional issues at hand would also serve as a recognition
> of their service and sacrifices.
> Earliest Possible Opportunity
> Regarding the third requirement that the question
> on constitutionality must be raised at the earliest possible opportunity, the
> Court held in Arceta v. Mangrobang 122 that it does not necessitate an
> immediate elevation of the matter to the Court. Earliest opportunity means
> that the question of unconstitutionality of the act in question should have been
> immediately raised in the proceedings in the court below. Considering that the
> present constitutional challenge against Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR
> was directly filed with this Court, the third requirement of judicial review of
> "earliest possible opportunity" is met because the issue of constitutionality is
> raised at the first instance.123
> Lis Mota
> 119 Rollo, p. 366.
> 120 Id. at 11.
> 121 876 Phil. 596 (2020) [Per J. Gesmundo, E11B anc].
> 122 476 Phil. 106 (2004) [Per J. Quisumbing, En Banc].
> 123 Atty. Calleja v. Executive Secreta,y Medialdea, 918-8 Phil. 1 (2021) [Per J. Carandang, En Banc].
>
> Decision 24 G.R. No. 248680
> The final requirement of /is mota dictates that "[t]he Court will not pass
> upon a constitutional question, although properly presented .... if the case can
> be disposed of on some other [ground] such as the application of a statute or
> general law." 124 Thus, the petitioners must be able to show that the case cannot
> be legally resolved unless the constitutional question raised is adjudicated.
> The /is mota requirement is based on the rule that every law has in its favor
> the presumption of constitutionality, and to justify its nullification, there must
> be a clear and unequivocal breach of the Constitution, and not one that is
> doubtful, speculative, or argumentative. 125
> In this case, the Petition alleges constitutional issues affecting the
> provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR. Thus, the issue of
> constitutionality raised in the Petition is the very /is mota of the case.
> Having resolved the procedural issues, the constitutionality of
> the assailed provisions of Republic Act No. 11199 and its IRR must now be
> addressed squarely.
> The Substantive Issues
> No Violation of the Equal Protection Clause
> The petitioners argue that Section 9-B, subsections (a), (c), and (e) of
> Republic Act No. 11199 are unconstitutional for violating the equal protection
> clause.126
> The equal protection clause under the Constitution means that "no
> person or class of persons shall be denied of the same protection oflaws which
> is enjoyed by other persons or other classes in the same place and in like
> circumstances." 127
> The equal protection clause is directed principally against undue favor
> and individual or class privilege. It is not intended to prohibit legislation
> which is limited to the object to which it is directed or by the territory in which
> it is to operate. It does not require absolute equality, but merely that all
> persons be treated alike under like conditions both as to privileges conferred
> and liabilities imposed.128
> 124 Parcon-Song v. Parcon, 876 Phil. 364, 400 (2020) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc], citing Ty v. Hon. Trampe,
> 321 Phil. 81, 103 (1995) [Per J. Panganiban, En Banc].
> 125 Garcia v. Executive Secretary, 602 Phil. 64, 82 (2009) [Per J. Brion, En Banc].
> 126 Rollo, p. 358.
> 127 Tolentino v. Board of Accountancy, 90 Phil. 83, 90 (1951) [Per J. Bautista, En Banc].
> 128 Zomer Development Company, Inc. v. Special Twentieth Division of the Court of Appeals, Cebu Ciy, et
> al. 868 Phil. 93, 108 (2020) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
>
> Decision 25 G.R. No. 248680
> The equal protection clause, therefore, does not preclude classification
> of individuals who may be accorded different treatment under the law as long
> as the classification is reasonable and not arbitrary, 129 such that: (1) it rests on
> substantial distinctions; (2) it is germane to the purpose of the law; (3) it is not
> limited to existing conditions only; and ( 4) it applies equally to all members
> of the same class.130 It is only in cases where there are real and substantial
> differences to distinguish one class from another that the law may treat and
> regulate one class differently from the other.131
> Thus, a statute that treats one class differently from another class will
> not violate the equal protection clause as long as the classification is valid.
> In Samahan ng Progresibong Kabataan v. Quezon City, 132 the Court
> summarized the three tests to determine the reasonableness of a classification:
> The strict scrutiny test applies when a classification either (i) interferes with
> the exercise of fundamental rights, including the basic liberties guaranteed
> under the Constitution, or (ii) burdens suspect classes. The intermediate
> scrutiny test applies when a classification does not involve suspect classes
> or fundamental rights, but requires heightened scrutiny, such as in
> classifications based on gender and legitimacy. Lastly, the rational basis test
> applies to all other subjects not covered by the first two tests.133
> In this case, the Court must apply only the rational basis test since
> Republic Act No. 11199 is a social welfare legislation. Rational basis test is
> applied to legislative or executive acts that have the general nature of
> economic or social welfare legislation.134
> In this jurisdiction, the Court mainly decides equal protection
> challenges using a "rational basis" test, coupled with a "deferential" scrutiny
> of legislative classifications and a reluctance to invalidate a law unless there
> 129 National Power Corporation v. Pinatubo Commercial, 630 Phil. 599,609 (2010) [Per J. Corona, Third
> Division].
> 130 GSIS, Cebu City Branch v. Montesclaros 478 Phil. 573, 587 (2004) [Per J. Carpio, En Banc].
> 131 Id. at 587-588.
> 132 815 Phil. 1067 (2017) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
> 133 id. at 1113-1114, citing Central Bank Employees Association, Inc. v. Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 487
> Phil. 531 (2004) [Per J. Puno, En Banc]; White Light Corporation v. City of Manila, 596 Phil. 444
> (2009) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc]; Ang ladlad LGBT Party v. COMELEC, 632 Phil. 32, 77 (2010) [Per J.
> Del Castillo, En Banc]; JOAQUIN BERNAS, S.J. THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES
> : A COMMENTARY 139-140 (2009); Concurring Opinion of Associate Justice Teresita J. Leonardo
> De Castro in Garcia v. Drilon, 712 Phil. 44, 124-127 (2013) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc]; Disini,
> Jr. v. Secretary of Justice, 727 Phil. 28, 97-98 (2014) [Per J. Abad, En Banc]; Mosqueda v. Filipino
> Banana Growers & Exporters Association, Inc., 793 Phil. 17 (2016) [Per J. Bersamin, En Banc].
> 134 J. Nachura, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion in Biraogo v. The Philippine Truth Commission of 2010,
> 651 Phil. 374 (2010) [Per J. Mendoza, En Banc].
>
> Decision 26 G.R. No. 248680
> is a showing of a clear and unequivocal breach of the Constitution. 135
> In British American Tobacco v. Sec. Camacho, 136 the Court explained that:
> Under this test, a legislative classification, to survive an equal protection
> challenge, must be shown to rationally further a legitimate state interest.
> The classifications must be reasonable and rest upon some ground of
> difference having a fair and substantial relation to the object of the
> legislation. Since every law has in its favor the presumption of
> constitutionality, the burden of proof is on the one attacking the
> constitutionality of the law to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
> legislative classification is without rational basis. The presumption of
> constitutionality can be overcome only by the most explicit demonstration
> that a classification is a hostile and oppressive discrimination against
> particular persons and classes, and that there is no conceivable basis which
> might support it. 137 (Emphasis supplied)
> The Court notes that a declared policy of Republic Act No. 11199 is to
> extend social security protection to Filipino workers, local or overseas, and
> their beneficiaries. I38
> Thus, for the first time, sea-based and land-based OFW s are now
> compulsorily covered by the SSS. For this purpose, land-based OFWs are
> treated in the same manner as self-employed persons. However, the DF A, the
> DOLE, and all its agencies involved in deploying OFW s for employment
> abroad are mandated to negotiate bilateral labor agreements with the OFW s'
> host countries to ensure that the employers of land-based OFWs, similar to
> the principals of sea-based OFWs, pay the required SSS contributions, in
> which case these land-based OFWs shall no longer be considered in the same
> manner as self-employed persons.
> Migrante International et al. point out that land-based OFWs are treated
> in the same manner as local employees in terms of compulsory coverage in
> the SSS. 139 However, Migrante International et al. argue that land-based
> OFW s are not similarly situated as local employees, since the employers of
> land-based OFWs are beyond the ambit of Philippine laws and government
> enforcement 140 While treated alike in terms of compulsory coverage, the
> petitioners question the difference of treatment in terms of the privilege of
> mandating the employer's contribution. 141 Additionally, Migrante
> International et al. argue that the treatment of land-based OFWs as self
> employed persons has no reasonable justification 142 because unlike self-
> 135 Biraogo v. The Philippine Truth Commission of 2010, 651 Phil. 374,549 (2010) [Per J. Mendoza, En
> Banc].
> 136 584 Phil. 489 (2008) [Per J. Ynares-Santiago, En Banc].
> 137 Id. at 525.
> 138 Republic Act No. 11199 (2018), sec. 2.
> 139 Rollo, p. 362.
> 140 Id. at 360.
> 141 Id. at 362.
> Id.
> 142
>
> Decision 27 G.R. No. 248680
> employed persons, land-based OFWs are employees with actual employers. 143
> Furthennore, there is no reasonable basis for land-based OFWs to be treated
> differently from sea-based OFWs. 144 Sea-based OFWs have manning
> agencies paying for them as employers, while land-based OFWs, even those
> with manning agents, will have to pay the whole amount of SSS premiums
> until such time as the Philippine government secures the bilateral
> agreements. 145
> The Court finds that there is reasonable basis to warrant differential
> treatment among local employees, self-employed persons, land-based
> OFW s, and sea-based OFW s.
> As previously mentioned, Republic Act No. 11199 aims to extend
> social security protection to Filipino workers, both local and overseas, and
> their beneficiaries. Irrespective of employment type, all employees have the
> right to access essential social security benefits. Social security serves as a
> safeguard against various life-cycle risks, including old age, unemployment,
> sickness, injury, maternity, disability, and loss of income. Without such
> protection, employees and their beneficiaries could face insurmountable
> financial hardships due to unforeseen events. Therefore, Republic Act No.
> 11199 mandates compulsory coverage in the SSS to ensure that its members
> have timely and reliable social security protection. Membership in the SSS
> aligns with the lawful exercise of the police power of the State. 46
> i
> Furthermore, the right to social security is firmly anchored m
> international human rights law, particularly the Universal Declaration of
> Human Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
> and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). Articles 22 and 25 of the UDHR categorically
> state that everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security, as
> well as to a standard of living adequate for their health and well-being.
> Additionally, Article 9 of the ICESCR establishes a clear legal obligation for
> countries to progressively implement the right to social security.
> As a signatory to these international human rights instruments, the
> passage of Republic Act No. 11199 to specifically include OFWs in the
> coverage of the SSS affirms the Philippines' commitment to the progressive
> realization of providing all employees the right to social security protection.
> Thus, the Court affirms that membership in the SSS is mandatory for all
> OFWs, whether land-based or sea-based.
> 143 Id. at 363.
> 144 Id.
> 145 Id. at 364.
> 146 Philippine Blooming Mills Co., Inc. v. Social Security System, 124 Phil. 499 (1966) [Per J. Ban·era, En
> Banc].
>
> Decision 28 G.R. No. 248680
> In ensuring that all workers have access to social security protection,
> the State must address differences in the employees' nature of employment,
> status, and place of work. However, this cannot be done in transgression of
> fundamental rights.
> The Court notes that land-based OFWs occupy a unique pos1t10n.
> Indubitably, they have the right to social security protection, just like any other
> employee. However, as correctly pointed out by the respondents, the absence
> of social security agreements or bilateral labor agreements leaves the
> Philippine government without a means to compel foreign employers to
> contribute the employer's share of SSS premiums. 147 Consequently, land
> based OFWs find themselves compelled to bear the supposed employer's
> share, akin to self-employed individuals. This arrangement arises not from
> discrimination, but from practical necessity.
> As to the differential treatment of land-based OFW s and sea-based
> OFWs, the Court has already settled in Joint Ship Manning Group, Inc. that
> Section 9-B of Republic Act No. 11199 does not violate the equal protection
> clause due to the presence of a substantial distinction:
> Contrary thereto, land-based OFWs do not have singular or uniform
> employment contract because of the variety of work they perform. Their
> contracts depend on the nature of their employment and their place of work.
> This is not the first time that the issue of the substantial distinction
> between the sea-based OFWs and land-based OFWs has been raised before
> the Court. In The Conference of Maritime Manning Agencies, Inc. v.
> Philippine Overseas Employment Administration (Conference of Maritime
> Manning Agencies, Inc.), the petitioners therein assailed the
> constitutionality of the POEA's power to increase the minimum
> compensation and benefits in favor of seafarers under their SEC. One of
> their arguments was that there is violation of the equal protection clause
> because of an alleged discrimination against foreign shipowners and
> principals employing Filipino seamen and in favor of foreign employers
> employing overseas Filipinos who are not seamen, or land-based OFWs.
> In that case, the Court declared that there was no violation of the
> equal protection clause because there is valid substantial distinction
> between sea-based OFWs and land-based OFWs, particularly, in work
> environment, safety, dangers and risks to life and limb, and accessibility to
> social, civic, and spiritual activities. It was stated that:
> There is, as well, no merit to the claim that the
> assailed resolution and memorandum circular violate the
> equal protection and contract clauses of the Constitution. To
> support its contention of inequality, the petitioners claim
> discrimination against foreign shipowners and principals
> employing Filipino seamen and in favor of foreign
> 147 Id. at 468.
>
> Decision 29 G.R. No. 248680
> employers employing overseas Filipinos who are not
> seamen.
> It is an established principle of constitutional law that
> the guaranty of equal protection of the laws is not violated
> by legislation based on reasonable classification. And for the
> classification to be reasonable, it (1) must rest on substantial
> distinctions; (2) must be gennane to the purpose of the law;
> (3) must not be limited to existing conditions only; and (4)
> must apply equally to all members of the same class. There
> can be no dispute about the dissimilarities between land
> based and sea-based Filipino overseas workers in terms of
> among other things, work environment; safety, dangers and
> risks to life and limb, and accessibility to social, civic, and
> spiritual activities.
> Accordingly, it is an indisputable fact that there is a substantial
> distinction between sea-based OFWs and land-based OFWs as enunciated
> in the cited case of Conference of Maritime Manning Agencies, Inc. Thus,
> these two [} classifications of OFWs can be treated differently. 148
> (Emphasis supplied, citations omitted)
> Further, the petitioners in Joint Ship Manning Group ,Inc. also argued
> that the different classification of manning agencies of seafarers, as solidarily
> liable with the principal foreign ship owners for SSS contributions, is unfair.
> They pointed out that the DF A and DOLE are only mandated to secure
> bilateral labor agreements with land-based OFWs, but not for sea-based
> OFW s, which violates the equal protection clause.
> The Court rejected the argument and explained that:
> Thus, the solidary liability of manning agencies with respect to
> principal foreign ship owners has been established by law,
> particularly, (Republic Act] No. 8042, as amended, and duly implemented
> by the 2016 POEA Rules. Sec. 9-B (b) of [Republic Act] No. 11199, which
> treats manning agencies as employers for the sole purpose of recognizing
> their joint and solidary liability in favor of seafarers, simply acknowledged
> the existing law and regulations. This provision was not created by
> Congress out of thin air; instead, it was based on the cited law and
> regulations, which manning agencies already acceded to. Due to this
> existing and recognized solidary liability of manning agencies, it was
> reasonable for the law to no longer mandate the DF A and DOLE to secure
> bilateral labor agreements because the SSS coverage of the seafarers are
> already safeguarded.149
> Thus, the liability of manning agencies with respect to the contribution
> ofSSS premiums of sea-based OFWs under Section 9-B of Republic Act No.
> 11199, is founded on legal and contractual obligations. In contrast, there is no
> 148 Joint Ship Manning Group, Inc. et al. v. Social Security System, et. al. 876 Phil. 596, 619-620 (2020)
> [Per J. Gesmundo, En Banc].
> 149 Id. at 624.
>
> Decision 30 G.R. No. 248680
> singular or uniform employment contract applicable to land-based OFW s,
> which would justify imposing the same solidary liability to pay SSS
> contributions on their recruitment agencies.
> Thus, the Court finds that the classification in Section 9-B of Republic
> Act No. 11199 is grounded on substantial distinctions and rationally furthers
> a legitimate State interest. Importantly, this classification is also germane to
> the purpose of the law. Similarly, the assailed provisions do not apply only to
> existing conditions. All land-based OFWs are completely covered by the SSS,
> without any conditions. Hence, the third and fourth requisites-that the
> classification must not be limited to existing conditions only and that it must
> apply equally to all members of the same class-are complied with. There is
> therefore no violation of the equal protection clause.
> Invalid Exercise of Police Power
> The petitioners argue that the mechanism by which the compulsory SSS
> contributions are collected from the land-based OFWs under Rule 14, Section
> 7(iii) of the IRR of Republic Act No. 11199 constitutes an unjust deprivation
> of property without due process of law.150 According to the petitioners, it is
> ultra vires on the part of the SSS to enforce compulsory coverage of land
> based OFWs through the issuance of OECs.151 Additionally, the petitioners
> argue that this is patently oppressive. 152
> Article III, Section 1 of the Constitution states that no person shall be
> deprived of property without due process of law. Protected property includes
> the right to work and the right to earn a living. In JMM Promotion and
> Management, Inc. v. Court of Appeals, 153 the Court held that:
> A profession, trade[,] or calling is a property right within the
> meaning of our constitutional guarantees. One cannot be deprived of the
> right to work and the right to make a living because these rights are
> property rights, the arbitrary and unwarranted deprivation of which
> normally constitutes an actionable wrong 154 (Emphasis supplied)
> However, the right to property is not absolute. The State may deprive
> persons of property through the exercise of police power. However, such
> deprivation must be carried out with due process.
> 150 Rollo, p. 366.
> 151 Id.
> 152 Id. at 367.
> 153 329 Phil. 87 (1996) [Per J. Kapunan, First Division].
> 154 Id.
>
> Decision 31 G.R. No. 248680
> In the exercise of police power, "property rights of private individuals
> are subjected to restraints and burdens in order to secure the general comfort,
> health, and prosperity of the state." 155 The State's police power must not be
> arbitrary or unreasonable. Its purpose is to promote general welfare, public
> health and safety, among others. This measure, exercised out of necessity,
> may interfere with personal liberties or property rights in order to advance
> common good.156 To warrant such interference, two requisites must concur:
> (a) the interests of the public generally, as distinguished from those of a
> particular class, require the interference of the State; and (b) the means
> employed are reasonably necessary to the attainment of the object sought to
> be accomplished and not unduly oppressive upon individuals. In other words,
> the proper exercise of the police power requires the concurrence of a lawful
> subject and a lawful method.157
> To reiterate, Republic Act No. 11199 was enacted pursuant to the
> policy of the government to "promote social justice and ensure meaningful
> protection to members and their beneficiaries against the hazards of disability,
> sickness, maternity, old age, death, and other contingencies resulting in loss
> of income or financial burden." 158It is clear that said enactment implements
> the general welfare mandate of the Constitution and constitutes a lawful
> subject for the exercise of the police power of the State.
> What is being challenged here, however, is the mechanism by which
> the compulsory SSS contributions are collected from the land-based OFWs.
> To recall, the assailed provision of the IRR provides that for land-based OFWs
> in countries without any social security agreements or bilateral labor
> agreements with the Philippines, the measures for enforcement of compulsory
> coverage shall include, among others, the collection of contribution payments
> by the POEA and/or the concerned attached DOLE agencies, through its
> applicable documentation and deployment processes such as the issuance of
> the OEC.
> As correctly pointed out by Migrante International et al., this is beyond
> the rule-making power delegated by the legislature to respondents the SSS,
> the DFA, and the DOLE. Section 9-B ( e) of Republic Act No. 11199 provides
> that the DFA, DOLE, and SSS shall ensure compulsory coverage of OFWs
> through bilateral social security and labor agreements and other measures for
> enforcement. 159
> 155 Didipio Earth-Savers' Multi-Purpose Association, inc. v. Sec. Gozun, 520 Phil. 457, 476 (2006) [Per J.
> Chico-Nazario, En Banc].
> 156 Southern Luzon Drug Corporation v. DSWD, 809 Phil. 315, 342 (2017) [Per J. Reyes, En Banc].
> 157 Department of Education, Culture and Sports v. San Diego, 259 Phi I. IO1 6, 1021 (I 989) [Per J. Cruz,
> En Banc].
> 158 Republic Act No. 11199 (2018), sec. 2.
> 159 Rollo at 366.
>
> Decision 32 G.R. No. 248680
> The Court agrees with the petitioners that the use of deployment
> processes, such as the OECs, cannot be considered as "other measures for
> enforcement" following the principle of ejusdem generis.
> The basic statutory construction principle of ejusdem generis states that
> a general tenn following an enumeration of specific words of the same class
> is to be construed to include or be restricted to things akin to or resembling,
> or of the same kind or class as those specifically mentioned. 160
> In National Power Corporation v. Angas, 161 the Court explained the
> purpose and rationale of the principle of ejusdem generis:
> The purpose of the rule on ejusdem generis is to give effect to both
> the particular and general words, by treating the particular words as
> indicating the class and the general words as including all that is embraced
> in said class, although not specifically named by the particular words. This
> is justified on the ground that if the lawmaking body intended the general
> tem1s to be used in their unrestricted sense, it would have not made an
> enumeration of particular subjects but would have used only general terms.
> [2 Sutherland, Statutory Construction, 3rd ed., pp. 395-400]. 162
> In this case, the general phrase "other measures for enforcement"
> follows the enumeration of "bilateral social security and labor agreements".
> These bilateral social security and labor agreements are established with
> countries hosting OFW s to safeguard their welfare and social security rights.
> Applying the principle of ejusdem generis, the "other measures of
> enforcement" should be of a similar nature to bilateral social security and
> labor agreements. Notably, the use of OECs does not fall within the same
> category as bilateral social security and labor agreements.
> Furthermore, in his sponsorship speech, Senator Richard Gordon
> emphasized that land-based and sea-based OFWs are included in the coverage
> of the SSS to ensure that they would have pension when they retire. Senator
> Gordon highlighted that the DF A and the DOLE would be the primary
> agencies that would negotiate for the OFWs, especially those working in
> Middle East countries, while enhancing the functions of the Philippine
> embassies therein, to enable them to collect the SSS contributions. 163 Thus,
> Republic Act No. 11199 placed the primary burden on the DF A and the DOLE
> to ensure the compulsory collection of the SSS contributions of land-based
> OFWs. Consequently, it can be reasonably concluded that intrusive measures,
> such as subjecting the issuance of the OECs to this pre-condition, were not
> 160 liwag v. Happy Glen loop Homeowners Association, Inc., 690 Phil. 321, 333 (2012) [Per J. Sereno,
> Second Division].
> 161 284-A Phil. 39 (1992) [Per J. Paras, Second Division].
> 162 See also Pelizloy Realty Corporation v. The Province of Benguet, 708 Phil. 466, 481(2013) [Per J.
> Leonen, Third Division].
> 163 Journal, Senate, 17th Congress, Session No. 76 (May 22, 2018).
>
> Decision 33 G.R. No. 248680
> intended as "other measures for enforcement" for the collection of SSS
> contributions.
> Additionally, the POEA and the concerned attached DOLE agencies
> are not authorized by Republic Act No. 11199 to collect SSS contributions
> nor is the SSS allowed to delegate collection of SSS contributions to these
> agencies. While the SSS is given the authority to formulate, adopt, amend
> and/or rescind such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the
> provisions and purposes of Republic Act No. 11199, 164 its exercise must be
> within the confines of the law it seeks to implement. It has been settled that
> the rules and regulations that administrative agencies promulgate should be
> within the scope of the statutory authority granted by the legislature to the
> administrative agency. It is required that the regulation be germane to the
> objects and purposes of the law, and be not in contradiction to, but in
> conformity with, the standards prescribed by law. They must conform to and
> be consistent with the provisions of the enabling statute in order for
> such rule or regulation to be valid. 165 Thus Rule 14, Section 7(iii) of the IRR
> must be struck down for being inconsistent with the provisions of Republic
> Act No. 11199.
> Additionally, requiring the land-based OFWs to pay in advance their
> SSS contributions for the issuance of their OECs is not reasonably necessary
> to accomplish the State's objective of affording them social security
> protection. As correctly pointed out by Migrante International et al., land
> based OFW s who have not even commenced employment yet, much less
> received their salaries, are compelled to advance their SSS contributions. It is
> also noteworthy that, in fact, prior to the issuance of an OEC, a worker is
> technically not considered an OFW yet. The OEC serves as proof that the
> worker has been processed by the POEA for deployment. 166 However, despite
> this, they are being compelled to prepay the required SSS contributions;
> otherwise, they cannot leave the country due to the absence of an OEC. This
> situation places an undue burden on our OFW s, who often resort to borrowing
> money to cover costly deployment expenses. The Court is reminded of the
> hardships and sacrifices faced by our OFWs. In Olarte v. Nayona, 167 the Court
> held that:
> Our overseas workers belong to a disadvantaged class. Most of them
> come from the poorest sector of our society. Their profile shows they live
> in suffocating slums, trapped in an environment of crimes. Hardly literate
> and in ill health, their only hope lies in jobs they find with difficulty in our
> country. Their unfortunate circumstance makes them easy prey to
> avaricious employers. They will climb mountains, cross the seas, endure
> 164 Republic Act No. I 1199 (2018), sec. 4(a)( I).
> 165 SMART Communications Inc. v. National Telecommunications Commission, 456 Phil. 145,156 (2003)
> [Per J. Ynares-Santiago, First Division].
> 166 Rule 11, no. 26, Revised POEA Rules and Regulations Governing the Recruitment and Employment of
> Land-based Overseas Filipino Workers of 2016.
> 167 461 Phil. 429 (2003) [Per J. Sandoval-Gutierrez, Third Division].
>
> Decision 34 G.R. No. 248680
> slave treatment in foreign lands just to survive. Out of despondence, they
> will work under sub-human conditions and accept salaries below the
> minimum. The least we can do is to protect them with our laws. 168
> Furthermore, to enforce compulsory coverage of land-based OFW s
> through the issuance of OECs is unduly oppressive, unreasonable, and
> repugnant to the Constitution. It undermines the mandate of
> the Constitution to protect the rights of overseas workers and to promote
> their welfare. Article XIII, Section 3 of the Constitution states that the State
> shall: (1) afford full protection to overseas labor; (2) promote full
> employment and equality of employment opportunities for all; and (3)
> guarantee the rights of all workers to security of tenure, humane conditions
> of work, and a living wage. Article II, Section 18 of the Constitution states
> that, "The State affirms labor as a primary social economic force. It shall
> protect the rights of workers and promote their welfare." Yet, this provision
> places an undue burden on the land-based OFWs by imposing as condition
> to the issuance of their OEC the payment of the employer's contribution, an
> onus not placed on any other class of employee under the SSS coverage.
> To emphasize, Republic Act No. 11199 itself offers less intrusive
> measures to ensure the collection of SSS contributions from land-based
> OFW s. These include social security agreements, bilateral labor agreements,
> and other similar measures for enforcement. Requiring OFWs to pay their
> SSS contributions before they can secure their OECs does not meet the
> criteria for a valid police power measure.
> Violation of the Right to Travel
> Finally, Migrante International et al. assert that Section 7(iii) of Rule
> 14 of the IRR of Republic Act No. 11199 also violates their right to travel.
> The Court agrees.
> The right to travel is part of the "liberty" of which a citizen cannot be
> deprived without due process of law. It is part and parcel of the guarantee of
> freedom of movement that the Constitution affords its citizen. 169 Pertinently,
> Article III, Section 6 of the Constitution provides:
> Section 6. The liberty of abode and of changing the same within the
> limits prescribed by law shall not be impaired except upon lawful order of
> the court. Neither shall the right to travel be impaired except in the interest
> 168 Id. at 431.
> 169 Genuino v. De Lima 829 Phil. 691, 715-716. (2018).
>
> Decision 35 G.R. No. 248680
> of national security, public safety or public health, as may be provided by
> law.
> Based on the foregoing, it is apparent that the right to travel is not
> absolute. It may be impaired by a law that concerns national security, public
> safety or public health. It does not differentiate between measures that directly
> restrict the right to travel and those that do so indirectly in furtherance of
> another State purpose. Any government action that indirectly or incidentally
> affects a constitutional right is still significant, as any impairment of
> constitutionally protected rights must strictly comply with the Constitution's
> mandate. 170
> In the case of Samahan ng mga Progresibong Kabataan (SPA RK) v.
> Quezon City, 171 the Court examined the significance of the right to travel,
> highlighting its connection to other fundamental rights. The Court emphasized
> that the right to travel refers to the right to move freely from the Philippines
> to other countries or within the Philippines. It is a right embraced within the
> general concept of liberty and includes the right of citizens to be free to use
> their faculties in lawful ways and to live and work where they desire or where
> they can best pursue the ends of life. It is essential as it enables individuals to
> access and exercise their other rights, such as the rights to education, free
> expression, assembly, association, and religion. 172 In SPA RK, the Court
> characterized curfew ordinances as restrictive of the minors' right to travel,
> although primarily imposed for the interest of public safety, particularly the
> promotion of juvenile safety and prevention of juvenile crime.
> Similarly, in this case, the assailed provision of the IRR provides that
> land-based OFWs are required to pay in advance their SSS contributions for
> the issuance of the OEC. However, without the OEC, a land-based OFW's
> right to travel abroad is significantly restricted, as their right to work overseas
> hinges on obtaining the OEC. Without the OEC, a land-based OFW cannot be
> deployed to their place of work. Since the primary purpose of a land-based
> OFW's travel abroad is to work, requiring them to pay their SSS contributions
> in advance to obtain their OEC effectively deprives them of their right to
> travel and, consequently, their livelihood. Thus, the assailed provision of the
> IRR poses an actual restriction on the right to travel, although primarily
> imposed to enforce collection of SSS contributions. Additionally, this
> impairment on the land-based OFW s' right to travel does not serve the interest
> of national security, public safety or public health; rather, it primarily aims to
> enforce the collection of the required SSS contributions.
> 170 See J. Caguioa, Dissenting Opinion in Zabal v. Duterte, 846 Phil. 743,929 (2019) [Per J. Del Castillo,
> En Banc].
> 171 815 Phil. I 067(2017) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
> 172 Id. at 1106.
>
> Decision 36 G.R. No. 248680
> Furthermore, the existence of a law is a requirement for the curtailment
> of the right to travel.
> In Genuino v. De Lima, 173 the Court highlighted the necessity of a law
> before the right to travel may be impaired:
> Clearly, under the provision, there are only three considerations that
> may permit a restriction on the right to travel: national security, public
> safety or public health. As a further requirement, there must be an explicit
> provision of statutory law or the Rules of Court providing for the
> impairment. The requirement for a legislative enactment was purposely
> added to prevent inordinate restraints on the person's right to travel by
> administrative officials who may be tempted to wield authority under the
> guise of national security, public safety or public health. This is in keeping
> with the principle that ours is a government of laws and not of men and also
> with the canon that provisions of law limiting the enjoyment of liberty
> should be construed against the government and in favor of the
> individual. 174 (Emphasis supplied)
> In this case, the restriction on the land-based OFWs' right to travel is
> merely provided in an IRR. As mentioned, the existence of a law is a
> requirement for the curtailment of the right to travel. It is essential to note that
> the IRR is not a law; it is merely an administrative issuance designed to
> implement the provisions of Republic Act No. 11199. The authority of the
> Social Security Commission to promulgate the assailed provision of the IRR
> is anchored on Section 9-B and Section 30 of Republic Act No. 11199, which
> respectively provides:
> Section 9-B. Compulsory Coverage of Overseas Filipino Workers
> (OFWs) -
> (a) Coverage in the SSS shall be compulsory upon all sea-based and land
> based OFWs as defined under Republic Act No. 8042, otherwise known as
> the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995, as amended by
> Republic Act No. 10022: Provided, That they are not over [60] years of age.
> All benefit provisions under this Act shall apply to all covered OFWs. The
> benefits include, among others, retirement, death, disability, funeral,
> sickness and maternity.
> (c) Land-based OFWs are compulsory members of the SSS and considered
> in the same manner as self-employed persons under such rules and
> regulations that the Commission shall prescribe.
> 173 829 Phil. 691 (2018) [Per J. Reyes, Jr., En Banc].
> 174 /d.at717.
>
> Decision 37 G.R. No. 248680
> (e ) The DF A, the DOLE and, the SSS shall ensure compulsory coverage of
> OFWs through bilateral social security and labor agreements and other
> measures for enforcement.
> Section 30. Implementing Rules and Regulations. - The Commission shall
> promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Act not
> later than [90] days after its effectivity. (Emphasis supplied)
> Certainly, there is nothing in the foregoing provisions of Republic Act
> No. 11199 which authorizes the restriction of the right to travel to enforce the
> land-based OFWs compulsory coverage in the SSS. Any impairment or
> restriction in the exercise of a constitutional right must be clear, categorical
> and unambiguous. The rule is that:
> Constitutional and statutory provisions control with respect to what rules
> and regulations may be promulgated by an administrative body, as well as
> with respect to what fields are subject to regulation by it. It may not make
> rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of the
> Constitution or a statute, particularly the statute it is administering or which
> created it, or which are in derogation of, or defeat, the purpose of a
> statute. 175
> Consequently, the constitutional requirement that any impairment of
> the right to travel must be explicitly provided in a law is not met.
> A Final Note
> Social security protection is fundamentally grounded in the State's
> police power. By mandating social security coverage, the State ensures that
> all workers, regardless of their nature of employment, location, and status,
> have access to essential social security benefits, in times of need. This is
> especially beneficial to OFWs, who leave their families behind to work
> abroad. Aside from enduring separation from their loved ones, OFWs often
> face harsh working conditions, including long hours, excessive workloads and
> inadequate safety measures. Through coverage in the SSS, OFWs and their
> beneficiaries are safeguarded from the hazards of disability, sickness,
> maternity, old age, death, and loss of income. While social security protection
> for OFWs is crucial, the State grapples with challenges related to differences
> in workers' nature of employment, status, and place of work. In addressing
> these challenges, the State is justified in making reasonable distinctions
> among workers to ensure comprehensive SSS for all. However, it is essential
> that the State does not unduly burden OFWs when enforcing the collection of
> SSS contributions. Unfortunately, the assailed provision of the IRR of
> Republic Act No. 11199 requires land-based OFWs to pay SSS contributions
> before receiving their OEC. This measure unjustly deprives land-based OFWs
> 175 SMART Communications, Inc. v. National Telecommunications Commission, 456 Phil. 145, 156 (2003)
> [Per J. Ynares-Santiago, First Division].
>
> Decision 38 G.R. No. 248680
> of their right to work and places an inordinate restraint on their right to travel.
> To truly honor the sacrifices of our OFWs, often hailed as modem-day heroes,
> it is crucial to refrain from oppressive policies that unfairly burden them.
> ACCORDINGLY, the Petition for Certiorari and Prohibition is
> PARTLY GRANTED. Rule 14, Section 7(iii) of the Implementing Rules and
> Regulations of Republic Act No. 11199 is declared UNCONSTITUTIONAL
> for being contrary to Sections 1 and 6 of Article III of the Constitution.
> The Social Security System, Philippine Overseas Employment
> Administration, and Department of Labor and Employment are
> PERMANENTLY ENJOINED from implementing this unconstitutional
> prov1s1on.
> The constitutionality of the assailed provisions of Republic Act No.
> 11199 and the remaining assailed provisions of the Implementing Rules and
> Regulations of Republic Act No. 11199 are UPHELD. Pursuant to Rule 50,
> Section 1 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No.
> 11199, these provisions remain in force and effect.
> SO ORDERED.
> WE CONCUR:
>
> Decision 39 G.R. No. 248680
> On Official Business
> RAMONP AULL.HERNANDO
> Associate Justice Associate Justice
> HENR
> On Official Leave
> SAMUELH . GAERLAN
> Associate Justice
> JHOSE~PEZ
> Associate Justice
> ~
> ;'
> JO~'ff:. MARQUEZ
> ssociate Justice Associate Justice
> ~o~
> Associate Justice
>
> Decision 40 G.R. No. 248680
> CERTIFICATION
> Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 13 of the Constitution, I certify that
> the conclusions in the above Decision had been reached in consultation before
> the case was assigned to the writer of the opinion of the Court.
