# GR-MTJ-23-017

**MTJ-23-017 Aldrin B. Magaoay Vs. Hon. Ateneones S. Bacale, Presiding Judge, Municipal Trial Court, Biliran-Cabucgayan, Biliran**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: MTJ-23-017 Aldrin B. Magaoay Vs. Hon. Ateneones S. Bacale, Presiding Judge, Municipal Trial Court, Biliran-Cabucgayan, Biliran
- **Ponente**: Per Curiam
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: March 4, 2022
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2024/12/MTJ-23-017.pdf)

---

> :\p.r.s~.,li
> tI .
> s
> 31\epublic of tbe tlbilippines
> $Upreme (!Court
> ;fffilanila
> EN BANC
> ALDRIN B. MAGAOAY, A.M. No. MTJ-23-017 [Formerly
> Complainant, OCA IPI No.19-3073-MTJ]
> PRESENT:
> GESMUNDO, C.J,
> LEONEN,
> CAGUIOA,*
> HERNANDO,
> LAZARO-JAVIER,
> -versus- INTING,
> ZALA:rvtEDA,
> LOPEZ, M.,
> GAERLAN,
> ROSARIO,
> LOPEZ, J.,
> DIMAAMPAO,
> MARQUEZ,
> KHO, JR., and
> HON. ATENEONES • S. SINGH, JJ
> BACALE, .PRESIDING
> JUDGE, lVIUNICIP AL
> CIRCUIT TRIAL COURT,
> BILIRAN-CABUCGA YAN, Promulgated:
> BILIRAN,
> Respondent. _J_ul_y_2_3_, _2_02_4_ ______
> ~
> •
> X ·- ---------------- ¥-------------------------------------------------------------------X
> DECISiON
> * On official leave.
>
> Decision 2 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> PERCURIAM:
> The Case
> This administrative complaint1 charges respondent Judge Ateneones S.
> Bacale (Judge Bacale) , Presiding Judge, of the Municipal Circuit Trial Court
> (MCTC), ofBiliran-Cabucgayan, Biliran, with gross misconduct in violation
> of the Code of Judicial Conduct.
> Antecedents
> Complainant Aldrin Magaoay (Magaoay) alleged that he is a
> pharmaceutical supplier/distributor based in Biliran. In 2016, Judge Bacale
> informed him of a project where four hospitals in Manila needed medicine
> supplies worth PHP 129,000,000.00, and that the Executive Secretary of
> Mayor Joseph Estrada (Mayor Estrada) was his (Judge Bacale's) wife,
> Romilda Amago Bacale (Romilda), who can facilitate the procurement of
> medicines, implying that they need not undergo the required bidding process.
> Judge Bacale demanded from him an initial sum of PHP. 100,000.00,
> supposedly for his company's accreditation. Magaoay personally handed the
> amount to Judge Bacale in .full confidence that he would be assisted in
> executing a contract with the City of Manila. Judge Bacale then instructed
> Magaoay to meet with a ce~in Joaquin Ashley Dela Cruz (Dela Cruz), an
> alleged court employee. 2 As will be further shown below, during the TIB
> proceedings Magaoay clarified that Dela Cruz was not a court employee but
> only a personal assistant or 'boy" of Judge Bacale.
> Romilda and Dela Cruz constantly demanded from him certain amounts
> of money supposedly for the execution of a project contract. For the next few
> years, he had given Dela Cruz and Romilda a total of around PHP
> 20,000,000.00, either through bank transfer or by personal delivery.3
> \\lhen he eventually realized that the project would never materialize
> and that .he was only being deceived into giving more money, he filed the
> present administrative complaint against Judge Bacale for gross misconduct.4
> Rollo, Vol. .1, pp. 7--12.
> 2 Rollo, Vol. 2, pp. 258-259.
> 3 Id at 263-264.
> 4 Id. at 264.
>
> Decision 3 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> In his Comment, 5 Judge Bacale admitted that he met Magaoay but
> denied that he conspired with his wife Romilda regarding the procurement of
> medicine. In fact, they have been separated for more than 30 years. It was only
> in 2013 that they again started communicating with each other after his house
> in Tacloban was destroyed by typhoon Yolanda. He did not know the nature
> of her work, the people she was working with, and the transactions she
> entered, except those she would occasionally relay to him. He was asked by
> his wife to "look for a supplier of medicines." He claimed that it was his wife
> who arranged his meeting with Magaoay and that when he was handed an
> envelope by complainant, he did not know what it was for, nor did he open it.
> He never represented nor promised that he eould secure a contract for the
> supply of medicines to hospitals in Manila. 6
> Proceedings before the Office of the Executive Director and
> the Judicial Integrity Board
> In its Report an4 Recomrnend~tion7 dated March 4, 2022, the Office of
> the Executive Director recommended to the Judicial Integrity Board (IlB) that
> the complaint should be subject to formal investigation, since it appears from
> the records that Judge Bacale's involvement in the anomalous transaction was
> more than just an innocent messenger.
> In its Report8 dated April 3, 2023, the IlB found a prima facie. case and
> held that the substantial factual issue of whether Judge Bacale conspired with
> his wife in defrauding Magaoay must be resolved. It recommended to the
> Court that the administrative complaint be re-docketed as a regular
> be
> administrative matter a formal investigation conducted. The Court
> a11ci
> approved the JJB's recommendation through its Resolution9 dated July 3,
> 2023. Consequently, the IlB set the case Jor hearing and during which, the
> parties prese.nted their respective testimonial and documentary evidence.10
> Magaoay testified that in 2016, his friend, Bill Flores (Flores), asked
> him if he wanted to do business with the City of Manila. Flores claimed that
> he is acquainted with a certain judge who can help him in securing contracts
> from the City of tv1anila. In July 2016, he was intro.duced to Judge Bacale,
> who represented_ himself as the husband of Romilda; the Executive Secretary
> of then Mayor Estrada. judge Bacale showed him a 11st of available c_ontracts .
> . . .
> ,
> 5 Rollo, Vol. 1, pp. 421-423: •
> •
> 6 Id at 421-422.
> 7 Id at 424-429.
> 8 Id at 424-429, Tne Report was penned by Justice Romeo J. Callejo, Sr. (Ret.), and concurred in by
> Justices Angelina $9-ridoval-Gutierrez {Ret.), Sesinado E. Villon (Rct.), Rodolfo A. Ponferrada (Ret.).,
> and Cielito M. Mindaro-Grulla (Ret.) of the Judicial Integrity Board, Supreme Court.
> 9 Id at 439-440.
> 10 Rollo, Vol. 2,. p. 261.,
>
> Decision 4 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> They chose four hospitals to which he could allegedly sell medical supplies
> worth up to PHP 50,000,000.00. Judge Bacale instructed Magaoay to give him
> all the necessary documents on their next meeting, including the amount of
> PHP 100,000.00 as fee for him to "lock in" the contracts.11
> They had their second meeting in August 2016 at Solaire Hotel in Pasay
> City. Before their meeting, Judge Bacale reminded Magaoay to bring cash,
> not a check. When they met at Solaire, Judge Bacale showed Magaoay t;he
> book-bound documents ready for submission to the City of Manila and then
> Magaoay handed Judge Bacale an envelope with PHP 100,000.00 cash. Judge
> Bacale counted the money before securing it inside his sling bag. Without the
> knowledge of Judge Bacale, he took a photograph of him while counting the
> money. The meeting ended with Judge Bacale thanking and assuring Magaoay
> that he would give the documents to his wife. When asked about the bidding
> process; Judge Bacale answered "that is why you have insiders, my wife will
> take care of that."12
> _
> Months later, upon his inquiry, Judge Bacale informed him that he
> already talked to his- wife and that the project may be implemented the
> following year. Judge Bacale introduced him to "one of his men" named Dela
> Cruz. According to Judge Bacale, Dela Cruz will give him instructions on the
> next phase oft he project. As stated, when asked by Justice Ponferrada whether
> a
> Dela Cruz was indeed court employee, Magaoay clarified that Dela Cruz
> was only a personal assistant or "boy" of Judge Bacale.13 In March 2017, he
> 11 Id. at 261-262.
> 12 Id.
> 13 TSN, Aldrin B. Magaoay, August 23, 2023, pp. 62-63.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> You said earlier that this Ashley received some money from you, correct?
> [MAGAOAY]:
> Yes, your Honor.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> Is he a member oft.lle court of the respondent or not?
> [MAGAOAY]:
> He's a member.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> What is his position?
> [MAGAOAY]:
> Something like an errand boy.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> There is no "court effand boy" position in the court, so does this mean that you do not know?
> [MAGAOAY ]: ..
> Actually, I don't know his item iri fu'eir c,rcle, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> What is your basis for saying that he's a member of the court staff? _
> [MAGAOAY], ••
> You mean the court, Your Honor, Biliran court?
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA: •
> Yes.
> [MAGAOAY]
>
> Decision· 5 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> met with Dela Cruz, who explained to him that he needed to buy three bid
> documents for the project amounting to PHP 60,000.00. One would be for his
> company while the two others would be for "dummy companies." He paid the
> amowit through online· deposit. 14
> Over the next three years, Dela Cruz regularly texted him, asking him
> i
> to p~y for certain documents. Each time, he complied by depositing the money
> either in Dela Cruz's or Romilda's account. He was aware that he was
> engaging in an illegal transaction, but since he was dealing with Judge Bacale,
> he t0ok his word as an assurance that he could secure contracts from the City
> of Manila. When the total amount deposited reached PHP 19,863,000.00
> withiout any progress in the projects, he realized that Judge Bacale, in
> con~piracy with Dela Cruz and Romilda, had-been defrauding him.15
> I
> Consequently, he filed an administrative complaint against Judge
> Bacale, as well as with criminal cases against the latter, Dela Cruz, and
> Romilda for estafa, and violation of Republic Act No. 10175, also known as
> Cybercrime Prevention Act, and of Section 3(e) of Republic Act No. 3019.
> He admitted though that after the criminal and administrative cases were filed,
> Romilda had started to deposit PHP 20,000.00 to PHP 30,000.00 to his
> account to partially return his money but he cannot tell exactly how much was
> already returned to him.16
> !
> I
> Judge Bacale testified that he is the Presiding Judge ofMCTC, Biliran-
> j
> Cabµcgayan, Biliran and he has been a judge for 17 years. He met Magaoay
> in a hotel in Quezon City a long time ago. The meeting was pre-arranged by
> his wife, who only instructed him to get some documents from Magaoay.
> After several days, Magaoay called him to meet at Solaire Hotel. Again, he
> onli retrieved from Magaoay some documents as requested by his wife, as
> well as a brown envelope containing money. He did not bother to open the
> envdope or count the money inside. After said occassion, he never saw or
> communicated with Magaoay again. The whole time, he only acted as a
> messenger for his wife. He assumes that the complaint was filed only to
> pressure his wife to return the money she owed Magaoay .17
> During cross-examination, Judge· Bacale was shown photos of him
> apparently holding a brown envelope and counting money. He said that it was
> the first time he saw those photos. When asked as to what he was doing at the
> No, Your Honor, He's not a member of the Biliran court, He's just a "boy," I'm sorry to say that word,
> personal assistant, what I mean.
> 14 Rollo, Vol. 2, 262-263.
> 15 Id. at 263.
> 16 Id. at 263.
> 17 Id. at 265-266.
>
> Decision 6 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> time the photographs were taken, he replied that he could not recall anymore.
> He maintained that he did not count the money and just received the envelope.
> He then gave the envelope to his wife as soon as he got home. 18
> He went on to explain that he and his wife have already been separated
> for 30 years. When typhoon Yolanda struck Leyte and completely destroyed
> his house, it was his. wife who helped him get back on his feet. He admitted
> that he was aware that his transactions with Magaoay were illegal, but he was
> only complying with his wife's instructions to show his gratitude for her after
> everything she had done for him post-Yolanda. 19
> Romilda testified that she was an Administrative Officer IV at the
> Office of the City Mayor of Manila. She worked with a certain Mr. Pablo
> Casimiran (Casimiran), a consultant to Mayor Estrada, and Ms. Shiani
> Madayag (Madayag), Mayor Estrada's Secretary. As part of her work, she
> would look for suppliers of medicine for the public hospitals of the City of
> Manila. Casimiran instructed her to meet Magaoay. Due to her heavy
> workload, she asked her husband to be the one to meet Magaoay instead and
> to retrieve from the l~tt~r: _scnne documents regarding the project. Later,
> Casimiran informed her that she should get a PHP 100,000.00 accreditation
> fee from Magaoay. She relayed the instruction to her husband, who then
> obtained. the accreditation ,:·fee from Magaoay. Every time Casimiran and
> Madayag would require advances from Magaoay, she would tell Magaoay to
> deposit the advances to either her accmlmt or the account of Dela Cruz. She
> realized later on that the bidding documents Madayag sent to her were fake.
> Outright, she promised Magaoaythat she would return all the money he paid
> for the project.20
> On cross-examination, she admitted that she received in her account
> around PHP 18,000,000.00, which she gave to Casimiran who then gave the
> said amount to Madayag, albeit without any receipt or document as proof. As
> of that day, she has returned almost PHP 7,000,000.00 to Magaoay. She tried
> obtaining the money from Casimiran and Madayag, but both of them were
> always in the hospital due to cancer. Then, Casimirah died in 2017. She
> maintained that her husband was not involved in the project. It was too late
> when she realized the illegality of his participation.21
> • •
> 18 Id at 267.
> 19 Id at 266-267.
> 20 Id at 267-268.
> 21 Id. at 268-269.
>
> Decision 7 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> Report and Recommendation of the-Judicial Integrity Board
> In its Report and Recommendation.22 dated January 17, 2024, the JIB
> found Judge Bacale liable for gross misconduct constituting violations of
> Sections 1 and 2, Canon 2 and Sections l and 2, Canon 4 of the Code of
> Judicial Conduct. The JIB recommended that Judge Bacale be dismissed from
> the service, with forfeiture of all or part of his benefits as the Court may
> determine; and disqualification from reinstatement or appointment to any
> public office. Further, the JIB found that Judge Bacale also violated Sections
> 1, 2, and 12, Canon II and Section 2, Canon III of the Code of Professional
> Responsibility and Accountability (CPRA) and recommended that he be
> disbarred.23
> It noted that although Magaoay filed a Verified Motion/Manifestation24
> that he is no longer pursuing the case and is withdrawing his Formal Offer of
> Evidence, the investigation of the administrative complaint subsists as the
> Court has the power and .d uty to root out misconduct from among its
> employees.25 Thus:
> ACCORDINGLY, the Judicial Integrity Board respectfully
> RECOMMENDS to the Honorable Supreme Court that:
> 1. Presiding Judge Ateneones S. Bacale, Municipal Circuit Trial Court,
> Biliran-Cabucgayan, Biliran, be found GIDLTY of gross misconduct
> constituting violations of the Code of Judicial Conduct; and be
> DISMISSED from the service, with FORFEITURE of all or -part of
> the benefits as the Supreme Court may determine, and
> DISQUALIFICATION from reinstatement or appointment to any
> public office, including government-owned or controlled corporations.
> Provided, however, that the forfeiture of benefits shall in no case include
> accrued ieave credits; and
> 2. Respondent Judge Bacale be DISBARRED for violation of Sections 1,
> 2, and 12, Canon II, and Section 2, Canon III of the Code of Professional
> Responsibility and Accountability, and his name be ORDERED
> STRICKEN from the Roll of Attomeys.26
> 22 Id. at 258-288. The Report and Recommendation dated January 17, 2024 was penned by Justice Cielito
> N. Mindaro-Grulla (Ret.) and concurred in by Justices Angelina Sandoval-Gutierrez (Ret.) and Justice
> Rodolfo A. Ponferrada (Ret.) of the Judicial Integrity Board, Supreme Court.
> 23 Id. at 282-286.
> 24 Rollo, Vol. 1, pp. 7.15-716.
> 25 Rollo, Vol. 2, pp. 270-271.
> 26 Id. at 287.
>
> Decision 8 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> Our Ruling
> The Court resolves to adopt and approve with modification the Report
> and Recommendation27 dated January 17, 2024 of the JIB.
> First off, the purpose ofMagaoay in filing the present case to allegedly
> recover the money from Judge Bacale's wife is irrelevant vis-a-vis the real
> nature of the present administrative case which aims to determine whether
> Judge Bacale is still qualified to continue as a me~ber of the judiciary.
> Notably, Judge Bacale did not even refute that he met Magaoay on two
> occasions and received money from the latter relative to the project in Manila.
> He was aware of the illegal transaction between his wife and Magaoay. In
> fact, he even ·assured Magaoay that he could facilitate the award to him by the
> City of Manila ofthe supply contract for medicines worth PHP 50,000,000.00
> without the need of going through the procurement process. Magaoay
> . .
> '•
> testified:
> ATTY. VALLEJO:
> And what are the matters taken in your meeting with the said
> respondent Judge?
> MAGAOAY:
> During our first meeting, he introduced himself, and his wife is the
> Executive Secretary of then Mayor Joseph Estrada of [the] City of Manila.
> So, with those promises, that he can facilitate in giving me some business,
> I mean, delivering some drugs and medicines in the City of Manila.
> Since he introduced his wife to be as (sic) the Executive Secretary
> of then Mayor Joseph Estrada, he said "I can facilitate your company to get
> in O''. During the meeting, he showed me some list of contracts, "So this
> will be yours, if we can agree."
> ATTY.VALLEJO:
> You mentioned "I can facilitate." Who in particular told you that, "I
> can facilitate"?
> 27 Id. at 258-288.
>
> Decision 9 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly_ OCA IPINo. 19-3073-MTJ]
> MAGAOAY:
> Judge Bacale himself, sir.
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> What was the natui-e of that transaction?
> MAGAOAY:
> I will be delivering drugs and medicines in the City of Manila, Your
> Honor.
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> You will be supplying?
> MAGAOAY:
> Yes, Your Honor, I will be supplying drugs a..11.d medicines in the
> City of Manila.
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> Counsel, continue.
> ATTY.VALLEJO:
> Yes, Your Honor. Did he mention a certain amount with regards
> those particular transactions? To supp-ly drugs and medicines in the City of
> Manila?
> MAGAOAY:
> I remember sir, he showed me a document like 50 million, it does
> not end there, because he assured me, "once you get in, this will be [a]
> continuous project."28
> 28 TSN, Aldrin B. Magaoay, August 23, 2023, pp. 25-28.
> ~
>
> Decision 10 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> . [Fonnerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> I know the bidding process, Your Honor, but I also know how it is
> b~ing done; sad to say, in the government. That's why, when [Dela Cruz]
> told me that, there's a project, you need to buy three bid documents, so that
> it will be sure that it will [be] yours already. For a bidding there must be
> three suppliers to submit bid documents so that it would appear a perfect
> bidding. Since I knew already the system, he told me, "[okay,] you have to
> pay for the three bidding documents, so it will be yours." So I asked him
> (referring to [Judge Bacale]) "How about the bidding?" "No, no, that is why
> you have insiders, my wife will take care of that." And I'm talking to a
> judge, Your Honor, so I readily believe what he is saying, so I readily gave
> the money. That is the system so I accumulated almost PHP 20,000,000.00
> by giving deposits.29
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> He (Judge Bacale) assured you that you will be the supplier of
> medicines in these four hospitals?
> MAGAOAY:
> Yes, Your Honor. By way of saying that "my wife is the Executive
> Secretary, and you will be in good hands."
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> No[w ], you said earlier that you will give what you agreed upon, did
> I hear you right, Mr. Witness?
> MAGAOAY:
> Yes, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> Why? What was agreed upon?
> MAGAOAY:
> Yes, Your Honor. That I will be in, Your Honor. His term is "locked
> in money". So, during the first meeting, once you send your legal
> 29 Id at 56.
>
> Decision 11 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> documents, prepare for it, book bind then wait for my call, then we will
> meet. That is that time you give the money.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> How much money was agreed upon?
> MAGAOAY:
> That I will give himPHP 100,000.00, your Honor.30
> ATTY.VALLEJO:
> Do you have any document to prove that indeed, he accepted this
> PHP 100,000.00?
> MAGAOAY:
> Actually, Judge, paano ba ito? So habang binibigay, binibilang, I
> took photograph, sir.
> ATTY. VALLEJO:
> Do you have that particular picture showing that respondent Judge
> actually accepted this PHP 100,000.00?
> MAGAOAY:
> Yes sir. I can readily show to this Honorable Board.
> ATTY.VALLEJO:
> Can you present that particular picture to this Honorable Board?
> MAGAOAY:
> Yes, sir.
> 30 Id. at 33-34.
>
> Decision 12 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> Show it before the tribunal.
> ATTY.VALLEJO:
> May ~e request, Your Honor, this picture introduced by private
> complainant, be marked as our evidence, Exhibit B? ....
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> Is this the respondent? (Justice Gutierrez is pointing to a man
> holding an envelope)
> ATTY. VALLEJO:
> Yes, Your Honor. The witness was able to identify the respondent
> in the picture, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> Make it of record that the picture shows that.
> ATTY. VALLEJO:
> May I be allowed, Your Honor, to show to the counsel for
> respondent?
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> All right, paiiero. Show this picture and ask him who this person is,
> and what was he doing[.]31
> On cross-examination, Judge Bacale was shown a picture of himself
> counting the money handed to him by Magaoay inside a brown envelope and
> asked what he was doing in the picture. He answered that he could rio longer
> recall and maintained that he only received the envelope but did not count the
> money inside. His wife Rornilda, however, testified to the contrary, viz.:
> 31 Id. at 44-46.
>
> Decision 13 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> JUSTICE GRULLA:
> The second meeting, there was an envelope given to your husband
> Judge Bacale, which contain PHP 100,000.00. Did you tell your husband that
> he will be receiving that amount? That envelope?
> ROMILDA:
> Yes, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE GRULLA:
> So he knew about the envelope containing the money?
> ROMILDA:
> Yes, your Honor. 32
> Too, Judge Bacale himself testified on his direct participation in the
> transaction, viz.:
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> Mr. Witness, what exactly was this instruction of your wife? Can you
> clarify?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> She told me, Your Honor, to meet a certain person in a hotel
> somewhere in Quezon City and she told me that her companion somewhere
> in the City of Manila told her that the city needs a supply of medicines. And
> then, she told me that her friend in the City of Manila told her to meet this
> person. So, she instructed me to meet the complainant.
> JUSITCE GUTIERREZ:
> Did she tell you the purpose of your meeting \\-ith the complainant?
> Why will you meet the complainant according to your wife?
> 32 TSN, Romilda Amago Bacale, October 27, 2023, p. 59.
>
> Decision 14 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> JUDGE BACALE:
> She told me to inform the complainant that the City of Manila needs
> a [supply] of medicines and there are papers or documents to be prepared.
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> She told you that the hospitals in the City of Manila need medicines?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> Yes, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> And then what is your role on that? Are you aware that these hospitals
> need medicine?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> Because she told me, Your Honor, that the person whom I am going
> to meet is a supplier of medicines.
> JUSTICE GUTIERREZ:
> What is your participation? What is the relevancy of your presence
> during that meeting? Will you tell the Court? Why should you be there? You
> are a judge.
> JUDGE BACALE:
> Yes, Your Honor. Because she instructed me, Your Honor, and also
> in order to help her because she rescued me from typhoon "Yolanda."33
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> During this time that you met the complainant upon instruction of
> your wife, was that the time that you were still separated?
> 33 TSN, Judge Ateneones Bacale, October 18, 2023, pp. 46-48.
>
> Decision 15 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> JUDGE BACALE:
> No, Your Honor. Not anymore.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> You reconciled already?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> Yes, Your Honor.34
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> And you, a judge, [has] been made. an errand boy by a teacher, is that
> correct?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> Because she is my wife, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> But you did not, as a judge, tell your wife that "I am a judge. I must
> appear as I have learned from my duties and I must appear proper. It would
> not be proper for me to be engaged in this kind of transaction." Did you not
> advise your wife? I am sure you know that. You know the Code of Conduct
> for Judges?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> Yes, Your Honor. I did not anymore, Your Honor, because in order to
> pay back for her efforts in rescuing me, tinulungan ko na Zang.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> Effort in what?
> 34 Id. at 61-62.
>
> Decision 16. A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> JUDGE BACALE:
> She rescued me when typhoon "Yolanda" struck. I had nothing, Your
> Honor. I had nowhere to go. Ang bahay ko ay raised to the ground. Nothing,
> only clothing and books. Everything. Just to show gratitude, Your Honor, I
> have to help her.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> Gratitude to your wife?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> Yes, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> So, even when you knew that it was wrong, because of your gratitude,
> you complied with the instructions of your wife, correct?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> That's right, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> In other words, you took the risk because of your gratitude .
> .TTJDGE BACALE:
> Yes, Your Honor.
> JUSTICE PONFERRADA:
> And you are ready to accept the consequences, correct?
> JUDGE BACALE:
> Yes, Your Honor. 35
> 35 Id. at 64-67.
>
> Decision 17 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> Judge Bacale himself admitted during the hearing that he knew that his
> wife was engaged in an illegal manipulation of the bidding process for medical
> supplies to the hospitals in the City of Manila. Despite its illegality, he readily
> participated in it by acting as his wife's "bag man" and received from
> Magaoay his bidding documents and "lock-in money" in the amount of PHP
> 100,000.00. He even affirmed that his actions were in violation of the Code
> of Judicial Conduct.
> Too, the JIB gave credence to Magaoay's testimony that Romilda and
> Dela Cruz would not have been able to dupe him in the illegal transaction
> were it not for Judge Bacale's direct participation. Magaoay trusted him
> because of his position as a judge, a person in authority he could rely on. His
> judgeship gave Magaoay the impression that indeed, the project would push
> through because he and his wife would be the ones to facilitate it.
> Judges are enjoined to strictly comply with the New Code of Judicial
> Conduct. Integrity is essential not only to the proper discharge of the judicial
> office but also to the personal demeanor of juqges. Propriety and the
> appearance of propriety, on the other hand, are essential to the performance
> of all the activities of a judge.36 Sections 1 and 2 of Canon 2 and Sections 1
> and 2 of Canon 4 provide:
> CANON 2 - Integrity
> SECTION 1. Judges shall ensure that not only is their conduct above
> reproach, but that it is perceived to be so in the view of a reasonable
> ·observer.
> SECTION 2. The behavior and conduct ofj udges must ieaffirm the people; s
> faith in the integrity of the judiciary. Justice must not merely be done but
> must also be seen to be done.
> CANON 4 -Propriety
> Section 1. Judges shall avoid impropriety and the appeara..tJ.ce of impropriety
> in all of their activities. • •
> Section 2. A~. a subject of constant public scrutiny~ judges must accept
> personal restrictions that might be viewed as burdensome by the ordinary
> 36 Office oft he Court Administrator v. Reyes, A.M. No. RTJ-20-2579, October 10, 2023 [Per Curiam, En
> Banc].
>
> Decision 18 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJJ
> citizen and should do so freely and willingly. In particular, judges must
> conduct themselves in a way that is consistent with the dignity oft he judicial
> office.
> The Court has repeatedly admonished judges to adhere to the highest
> tenets of judicial conduct. They must be the embodiments of integrity and
> propriety. The exacting standards of conduct demanded from judges are
> designed to promote public confidence in the judiciary because the people's
> confidence in the judicial system is founded not only in the magnitude of legal
> knowledge and the diligence of the members of the bench, but also on the
> highest standard of integrity and moral uprightness they are expected to
> possess. When judges become the transgressor of ~ny law which they are
> sworn to apply, they place their office in disrepute, encourage disrespect for
> the law, and impair public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the
> judiciary itself. It is therefore paramount that the personal behavior ofj udges,
> both in the performance of. their duties and daily life, be free from any
> appearance of impropriety as to be beyond reproach.37
> It is not enough that judges possess competence in the law. They must
> also have moral integrity, as magistrates are measured not only by their
> official acts but also by their private morals, to the extent that these are
> externalized.
> In Tobias v. Limsiaco, Jr.,38 the Court defined gross misconduct in this
> wise:
> The aforementioned acts of respondent constitute gross misconduct.
> "Misconduct" means a transgression of some establish,ed and definite rule of
> action, willful in character, improper or wrong behavior. "Gross" has been
> defined as "011t of all measure, beyond allowance; flagrant; shameful; such
> conduct as is not to be excused. "39
> In Gacad v. Clapis, Jr., 40 the Court further emphasized that gross
> misconduct exists if the judicial act complained of is inspired by corrupt
> motive or a persistent disregard of well-known rules, viz.:
> Misconduct means intentional WTongdoing or deliberate violation of a
> rule oflaw or standard of behavior in connection with one's performance of
> official functions and duties. For grave or gross misconduct to exist, the
> judicial act complained of should be corrupt or inspired by the intention to
> 37 Tan v. Rosete, 481 Phil. 189, 202 (2004), [Per J. Puno, Second Division).
> 38 655 Phil. I, 10.:...1 I (201 I) [Per J. Peralta, Second Division].
> 39 Id. at 10-11.
> 40 691 Phil. 126, 136 (2012)[Per Curiam, En Banc].
>
> Decision 19 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> violate the law, or a persistent disregard of well-known rules. The misconduct
> must imply wrongful intention and not a mere error ofj udgment.41
> Here, Judge Bacale has shown a stubborn disregard of the rules which
> casts doubt on his integrity and sense of propriety as shown by the totality of
> the circumstances relating to his participation in his wife's illegal transactions.
> He did not inform his wife that as a judge, it would not be proper for him to
> assist her in her transaction with Magaoay. He should have known that family
> concerns are only secondary to preserving the.integrity of the judiciary.42
> Instead, Judge Bacale met with and even assured Magaoay that he could
> "facilitate" the award of contract~ to the latter by the City of Manila for the
> supply of medicines worth PHP 50,000,000.00 without the need to undergo
> the procurement process. Indeed, his actions tainted the image oft he judiciary.
> For knowingly participating in the act of manipulating the process of public
> bidding in violation of Sections 356 and 366 of Republic Act No. 7160,43 in
> relation to Section 3(e) of Repu9lic Act No. 3019,44 the Court finds Judge
> Bacale guilty of gross misconduct under the New Code of Judicial Conduct.
> Rule 140, Section 13 of the Rules of Court classifies gross misconduct
> as a serious charge, thus:
> SECTION 14. Serious Charges.-, Serious charges include:
> (a) Gross misconduct constituting violations of the Code of Judicial
> Conduct or ofthe Code of Conduct for Court Personnel;
> 41 Id. at 136.
> 42 See Vidal v. Dojillo, 501 Phil. 555, (2005) [Per J. Austria-Martinez, Second Division].
> 43 Local Government Code of 1991, approved on October 10,1991. SECTION 356. General Rule in
> Procurement or Disposal. - Except as otherwise provided herein, acquisition of supplies by local
> government units shall be through competitive public bidding. Supplies which have become
> unserviceable or no longer needed shall be sold, whenever applicable, at public auction, subject to
> applicable rules and regulations.
> SECTION 366. Procurement without Public Bidding. - Procurement of supplies may be made without
> the benefit of public bidding under any of the following modes:
> (a) Personal canvass ofresponsible merchants;
> (b) Emergency purchase;
> (c) Negotiated purchase;
> ( d) Direct purchase from manufacturers or exclusive distributors; and
> ( e) Purchase from other government entities.
> See Montejo v. People, 905 Phil. 1085, 1104-1105 (2021) [Per J. Inting, Third Division].
> 44 Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act, approved on August 17, 1960. For a successful prosecution under
> Section 3 (e) of RA 3019, the following elements must concur, to wit:
> 1. The offender must be a public officer;
> 2. The act was done in the discharge of the public officer's official, administrative, or judicial functions;
> 3. The act was done through manifest partiality, evident bad faith, or gross inexcusable negligence; and
> 4. The public officer caused any undue injury to any party, including the government, or gave any private
> party unwarranted benefits, advantage or preference.
> See Montejo v. People, 905 Phil. 1085, 1105 (2021) [Per J. Inting, Third Division].
>
> Decision 20 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> Rule 140, Section 17 of the same rules carries the sanctions to be
> imposed on a respondent found guilty of a serious charge, to wit:
> SECTION 17. Sanctions. -
> (1) If the respondent is guilty of a serious charge, any of the
> following sanctions may be imposed:
> ( a) Dismissal from the service, forfeiture ofa ll or part oft he
> benefits as the Supreme Court may determine, and
> disqualification from reinstatement or appointment to
> any public office, including government-owned or -
> controlled corporations. Provided, however, that the
> forfeiture of benefits shall in no case include accrued
> leave credits;
> (b) Suspension from office without salary and other benefits
> for more than six (6) but not exceeding one (1) year; or
> (c) A fine of more than Pl00,000.00 but not exceeding
> P200,000.00. (Emphasis supplied.)
> For his gross misconduct affecting his fitness and worthiness of the
> honor and integrity attached to his office, Judge Bacale should suffer the
> supreme penalty of dismissal from. the service.
> As for the recom.m.endation of the JIB for the simultaneous disbarment
> of Judge Bacale, we refer to our ruling in Office oft he Court Administrator v.
> Judge Eliza B. Yu. 45 The Court dismissed Judge Eliza B. Yu from the service
> for gross insubordination, gross misconduct, gross ignorance oft he law, grave
> abuse of authority, oppression, and conduct unbecoming of a judicial official.
> While the offenses charged against her were also considered as violations of
> the Lawyer's Oath, the Code of Professional Responsibility, and the Canons
> of Professional Ethics, it was shown that at that point in time, she has not been.
> afforded yet an opportunity to show cause why she should not be disbarred or
> otherwise disciplined as a member of the Bar. Thus, apart from dismissing
> Judge Yu from the service, the Court directed her, among others, to show
> cause in writing why she should not be disbarred for her unlawful acts.46 As
> it was, it was only after she submitted her written explanation that the Court
> disbarred her per its Res.olution dated March 14, 2017.
> 45 Office oft he Court Administrator v. Yu, 800 Phil. 307 (2016) [Per Curiam, En Banc].
> 46 /d.at419-421.
>
> Decision 21 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> In the case of Judge Bacale, he too has not been given yet an
> opportunity to show cause why he should not be disbarred or otherwise
> disciplined as a member of the Bar, pursuant to A.M. No. 02-9-02-SC. 47
> Verily, here and now, the Court orders him to show cause why his name
> should not be stricken off from the Roll of Attorneys.
> ACCORDINGLY, the Court finds respondent JUDGE
> ATENEONES S. BACALE GUILTY of gross misconduct for which he is
> DISMISSED from the service, with forfeiture of all the benefits due him,
> except accrued leave benefits, if any, with prejudice to re-employment in any
> branch of the government, including government-owned or -controlled
> corporations.
> Respondent JUDGE ATENEONES S. BACALE is also directed to
> SHOW CAUSE in writing within 10 days from notice why he should not be
> disbarred for violation of the Code of Professional Responsibility and
> Accountability as outlined herein.
> Let a copy of this Decision be entered into Judge Bacale's record as
> t
> a member of the bar and notice of the same be served on the Integrated Bar of
> the Philippines and on the Office of the Court Administrator for circulation to
> all courts in the country.
> SO ORDERED.
> ( on official leave)
> ALFREDO BENJAMIN S. CAGUIOA
> Senior Associate Justice Associate Justice
> 47 Re: Automatic Conversion of Some Administrative Cases against Justices of the Court of Appeals and
> the Sandiganbayan; Judges of Regular and Special Courts; and Court Officials Who are Lawyers as
> Disciplinary Proceedings Against them Both as Such Officials and as Members of the Philippine Bar,
> dated September 17, 2002 and took effect on October 1, 2002.
>
> •. ··!
> Decision 22 A.M. No. MTJ-23-017
> [Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-3073-MTJ]
> ~,L.HERNANDO
> Associate Justice
> HEN
> = ~
> 2:
> SAMUEL: ,c;AE .
> Associate Justice
> RIC .ROSARIO JHOSE~OPEZ
> Associate Justice
> "
> ~
> J ASP. RQUEZ
> ssociate Justice ~ssociate Justice
> ~O,J. ' FILOMENA D. SINGH
> Associate Justice Associate Justice
> /
