# Executive Order No. 398

**ENJOINING ALL DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES AND OFFICES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH THEIR RESPECTIVE REWARDS PROGRAMS**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 398
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1990/eo_398_1990.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 398 April 16, 1990**
>
> ENJOINING ALL DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES AND OFFICES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH THEIR RESPECTIVE REWARDS PROGRAMS
>
> WHEREAS, Section 6 of Republic Act No. 6713, the "Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees", has established a system of annual incentives and rewards "[i]n order to motivate and inspire public servants to uphold the highest standards of ethics";
>
> WHEREAS, while a Committee on Awards to Outstanding Public Officials and Employees has been created under Republic Act No. 6713 for the purpose of the system of incentives and rewards, Section 6, Rule V of the Rules Implementing the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards For Public Officials and Employees provides that:
>
> Nothing herein provided shall inhibit any department, office or agency from instituting its own rewards program in addition to those provided by, but not inconsistent with, these Rules.
>
> WHEREAS, there is a need to establish in every department, agency or office rewards program that shall motivate officials and employees to higher levels or performance in the government service;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. All departments, agencies and offices of the National Government are hereby enjoined to establish their respective Rewards Programs consistent with the provisions of Section 6 of Republic Act No. 6713 and the Rules Implementing the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards For Public Officials and Employees.
>
> Sec. 2. The Rewards Programs established for the purpose by any department, agency or office shall be submitted to the Committee on Awards to Outstanding Public Officials and Employees for approval.
>
> Sec. 3. Cash awards to deserving officials and employees in accordance with civil service laws as may be provided for in the Rewards Programs shall initially be sourced from savings in the respective appropriations of the departments, agencies and offices provided in the General Appropriations Act pursuant to Section 55 (e) of Presidential Decree No. 1177 entitled "Revising the Budget Process In Order to Institutionalize The Budgetary Innovations of the New Society". Thereafter, such sums necessary for the rewards programs shall be provided in the respective budgets of the departments, agencies and offices for inclusion in the General Appropriations Act.
>
> Sec. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety. lawphi1.net
>
>
>
