# Executive Order No. 390

**RECONSTITUTING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON THE PHILIPPINE NUCLEAR POWER PLANT**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 390
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1990/eo_390_1990.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 390 January 4, 1990**
>
> RECONSTITUTING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON THE PHILIPPINE NUCLEAR POWER PLANT
>
> Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. Section 2 of Executive Order No. 315, Series of 1988, is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "Sec. 2. Composition. The Committee shall be composed of a Chairman who shall be appointed by the President and the following officials or their duly authorized representatives:
>
> Secretary of Finance - Member
>
> Secretary of Budget and Management - Member
>
> Secretary of Science and Technology - Member
>
> Chairman, Presidential Commission on Good Government - Member
>
> Governor, Central Bank - Member
>
> Solicitor General - Member
>
> Director, Philippine Nuclear Research Institute - Member
>
> President, National Power Corporation - Member
>
> President, Philippine National Oil Company - Member
>
> Sec. 2. Section 4 (a) of Executive Order No. 315, Series of 1988, hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "(a) Legal Division, to be headed by the Chairman, and composed of the Secretary of the Budget and Management, the Chairman of the Presidential Commission on Good Government, the Solicitor General and the President of the National Power Corporation, which shall have primary supervisory responsibility for the enforcement of all claims and/or legal options relative to the PNPP."
>
> Sec. 3. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of January, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and ninety. lawphi1.net
>
>
>
