# Executive Order No. 4

**FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 175, DATED APRIL 30, 1994, AS AMENDED BY EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 223, DATED FEBRUARY 1995, EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 229, DATED MARCH 19, 1995, AND EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 259, DATED JULY 11, 1995, WHICH CREATED THE NORTHWESTERN LUZON GROWTH QUADRANGLE COMMISSION**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 447
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1997/eo_447_1997.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
>  EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 447, October 02, 1997 ]
>
> FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 175, DATED APRIL 30, 1994, AS AMENDED BY EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 223, DATED FEBRUARY 1995, EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 229, DATED MARCH 19, 1995, AND EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 259, DATED JULY 11, 1995, WHICH CREATED THE NORTHWESTERN LUZON GROWTH QUADRANGLE COMMISSION
>
> I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby further amend Section 1 of Executive Order No. 175, dated April 30, 1994, as amended by Executive Order No. 223, dated February 7, 1995, Executive Order No. 229, dated March 19, 1995, and Executive Order No. 259, dated July 11, 1995, which created the Northwestern Luzon Quadrangle Commission, to include the Chairman of the Cordillera Regional Assembly as Commission Member.
>
> This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> **DONE** in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of October in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> (Sgd.) **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **RUBEN D. TORRES**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
