# BTA Parliament Bill No. 172

**AN ACT MANDATING THE FORMULATION AND PUBLICATION OF A KATARUNGANG PAMBARANGAY HANDBOOK THAT WILL BE TRANSLATED INTO THE BARMM MAJOR DIALECTS**

---

**Parliament:** BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2
**Bill Number:** 172
**Status:** First Reading
**As of:** 06/21/2023

**Principal Author(s):** LOONG, DON MUSTAPHA A.

**Co-Author(s):** ALAMIA, LAISA M., LOONG, BENJAMIN T., AMPATUAN, BAINTAN A., MITMUG, RASOL Y., JR., MAWALLIL, AMILBAHAR S., AMBOLODTO, SUHARTO M., ISMAEL, RASUL E., LIM, JOHN ANTHONY L., HASSAN, HATIMIL E., CANDAO, BAI MALEIHA B., ORANON, SUWAIB L., AMENODEN, ABDULAZIZ M., ALIH, EDDIE M., MIDTIMBANG, TAWAKAL B., MAGLANGIT, TARHATA M., PANGANDAMAN, NABILA MARGARITA P., MIDTIMBANG, MICHAEL E., LORENA, JOSE I., MISUARI, ABDULKARIM T., MISUARI, NURREDHA I., ESTINO, MATARUL M., PIANG, RAMON A., SR., MENDOZA, FROILYN T., HADJI ABDULLAH, KHALID M., MUÑOZ, HUSSEIN P., ALI, IBRAHIM D., PARCASIO, RANDOLPH C., SHIEK, SAID M., ANAYATIN, SUSANA S., ANTAO, MOHAMMAD KELIE U., ABAS, AKMAD I., MALIK, HAMID U.

## Legislative History

Filed – 5/10/2023
First Reading – 6/21/2023

## Documents

- [Filed Copy (PDF)](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Bill-No.-172-MP-Don-Mustapha-Loong-ANDATING-THE-FORMULATION-AND-PUBLICATION-OF-A-KATARUNGANG-PAMBARANGAY-HANDBOOK.pdf)

---

*Source: [https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills-22/an-act-mandating-the-formulation-and-publication-of-a-katarungang-pambarangay-handbook-that-will-be-translated-into-the-barmm-major-dialects/](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills-22/an-act-mandating-the-formulation-and-publication-of-a-katarungang-pambarangay-handbook-that-will-be-translated-into-the-barmm-major-dialects/)*

## Full Text

============================================================
PAGE 1
============================================================
OW CON DUM BWYNY

=
oO

NNNP PRP RP RP RPP RP BP
NRFPOWANDUBWHNH Bb

PH HH WWW WWW WWW WrnNnN DN NYDN DN LP
WNHrROOAN DU HPWNHRP OW WAN DU HL W

Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY

Cotabato City
Bangsamoro a oe eat in vie Mindanao
dena PARLESMEENT Ee ey A iso
Second Regular Session 3 EAM
Name; S
Parliament Bill No. 1 7 2 oA
Authored by

MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE

Co-authored by
MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Benjamin T. Loong, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol
Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Atty.
John Anthony L. Lim, Hatimil E. Hassan, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, Suwaib L. Oranon,
Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Eddie M. Alih, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Tarhata M. Maglangit,
Nabila Margarita P. Pangandaman, Michael E. Midtimbang, Atty. Jose I. Lorena,
Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Nurredha I. Misuari, Matarul M. Estino, and Ramon A. Piang Sr.

AN ACT
MANDATING THE FORMULATION AND PUBLICATION OF A KATARUNGANG
PAMBARANGAY HANDBOOK THAT WILL BE TRANSLATED INTO THE BARMM
MAJOR DIALECTS

EXPLANATORY NOTE

Section 6, Article IV of Republic Act No. 11054, otherwise known as the Bangsamoro
Organic Law (BOL) provides that:

“Promotion of Unity. — The Bangsamoro Government
shall promote unity, peace, justice, and goodwill among

all peoples, as well as encourage a just and peaceful
settlement of disputes. ”

Katarungang Pambarangay or Barangay Justice System is a community-based mechanism
for dispute settlement administered by the basic political unit of the country - the Barangay! whose

. https:/ / www.galing pook.org / what-we-do/ awards/awardees/strengthening-the-justice-system-in-the-grassroots /


============================================================
PAGE 2
============================================================
WON DWN HBWN

NNNNNNNNRPRPRP RPP BRP PBB
NODOUBWNHR OW WON DUBPWNHEHRO

ultimate goal is to improve access to justice through amicable settlement of family and community
disputes.

Barangays are at the very frontline of the provision of basic services and have become a
strategic point to ensure that government programs are felt by the people, they being the first
responders of governance and are within the reach of mostly all constituents’.

Based on the findings of the National Capital Region Report, almost 20% of the
participants of a study conducted in NCR were not aware of any services offered by the Lupon.
Hence, it is possible to suggest that in more isolated areas, the lack of information will be higher
than in the capital region.*

In order to address the communities’ lack of knowledge and appreciation of the Barangay
Justice System and help the implementors of the Katarungang Pambarangay Law in understanding
their mandate, a handbook that will serve as a reference for Barangay officials will be formulated,
developed, and translated into the BARMM’s major dialects.

For these reasons, this representation earnestly asks for the approval of the bill.

Member of the Parliament — Bangsamoro Transition Authority

* Barangay Primer (2018), 6 Edition, Local Government Academy (LGA) Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)

* Silvia Sanz-Ramos Rojo. The Barangay Justice System in the Philippines: Is It An Effective Alternative To Improve Access to
Justice for Disadvantaged People? (2002)


============================================================
PAGE 3
============================================================
O ON DW HhRWN

Re
oO

NNNNNNN NNNRPBRP RP RBBB BBB
OMANADAUBWNHROWOAWAN DUBAWHN PB

Ww
oO

zB |

32
33
34

35
36
37
38

Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY

Cotabato City
moro Autonomous Region in Mustim Minde:
BTA PARLIAMENT Bangs saat
Second Regular Session ILLS AND INDEX DIVISION
Parliament Bill No. 1 7 2 gs aah gee .
Authored by

MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE

Co-authored by
MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Benjamin T. Loong, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol
Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Atty.
John Anthony L. Lim, Hatimil E. Hassan, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, Suwaib L. Oranon,
Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Eddie M. Alih, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Tarhata M. Maglangit,
Nabila Margarita P. Pangandaman, Michael E. Midtimbang, Atty. Jose I. Lorena,
Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Nurredha I. Misuari, Matarul M. Estino, and Ramon A. Piang Sr.

AN ACT
MANDATING THE FORMULATION AND PUBLICATION OF A KATARUNGANG
PAMBARANGAY HANDBOOK THAT WILL BE TRANSLATED INTO THE BARMM
MAJOR DIALECTS

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament in session assembled:
SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the “Alay sa Lupon Act of 2023”.

SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared the policy of the Bangsamoro
Government to promote unity, peace, justice, and goodwill among all peoples, as well as encourage
a just and peaceful settlement of disputes.*

SECTION 3. Definition of Terms.— For the purpose of this Act, “Katarungang
Pambarangay Law’ refers to the provisions in Chapter 7, Title I, Book III of the Local Government
Code of 1991 or to the applicable provision of the Bangsamoro Local Governance Code. Provided
That, in case of conflict, the latter shall govern.

4 Section 6, Article IV of Republic Act No. 11054, otherwise known as the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL)


============================================================
PAGE 4
============================================================
BWN

OW OND WI

10
il

a2
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

21
22

23
24
25
26
27
28

29
30

31

32

33

35

36
37

SECTION 4. Formulation of Katarungang Pambarangay Handbook. - The Ministry of
Interior and Local Government shall formulate, develop and publish a Katarungang Pambarangay
Law handbook which shall be translated into the major dialects of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao.

SECTION 5. Key Contents. — In the formulation of the handbook, including its writing
and publication, the Ministry concerned shall ensure that the material communicates the ideas
clearly to the concerned officials, makes the task of following the procedure as effortless as
possible, and includes annotations of relevant laws which shall include, but not be limited to
Katarangunang Pambarangay Law, jurisdictions, and special laws. The Handbook may be
republished every five (5) years to keep up with novel measures related to the implementation of
the Katarungang Pambarangay Law.

SECTION 6. Information-Dissemination. — The Ministry of Interior and Local
Government shall provide an electronic copy and a hard copy of the handbook to all the constituent
Barangays of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao and shall require the
maintenance of the availability of a hard copy in their respective offices.

SECTION 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within ninety (90) days from the
approval of this Act, the MILG shall, in consultation with other concerned government agencies,
experts, teachers, historians, linguists, legal luminaries and other stakeholders, promulgate rules
and regulations necessary to implement this Act.

SECTION 8. Appropriations Clause. — The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the Bangsamoro Appropriations Act.

SECTION 9. Repealing Clause. — All regional laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations,
other issuances, or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. Separability Clause.— If any provision of this Act is declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other parts or provisions not
affected thereby shall continue to remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 11. Effectivity. — This act shall take effect fifteen days (15) after its complete
publication in at least two (2) regional newspapers of general circulation.

APPROVED,

Author:

HON. MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE


============================================================
PAGE 5
============================================================
OW ON ADU BWDN

PPHPHPHPHRRWWWWWWWWWWNnNNNNNNNNNNRP RRP PRP BP BPH BE
NO PWNPRPOHW WON DU BWNHRODOHUO WN HAUBWNHHR OW WN DUBWNHHO

Co-authors:

HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA
HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG

HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN
HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG

HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL

HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO
HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL

HON. MP ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM
HON. MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN

HON. MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO

HON. MP SUWAIB L. ORANON

HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN

HON. MP EDDIE M. ALIH

HON. MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG

HON. MP TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT

HON. MP NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN
HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG

HON. MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA

HON. MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI

HON. MP NURREDHA I. MISUARI

HON. MP MATARUL M. ESTINO

HON. MP RAMON A. PIANG SR.


============================================================
PAGE 6
============================================================
O ON DU BWYN

a a a
hWNPFP OO

Attested by:

HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG
Speaker

Certified Correct:

PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL
Secretary General
