# BTA Parliament Bill No. 171

**AN ACT MANDATING THE INTEGRATION OF BANGSAMORO AND INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ CULTURE, TRADITIONS, CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS IN THE SECONDARY EDUCATION CURRICULUM OF ALL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN BARMM, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

---

**Parliament:** BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2
**Bill Number:** 171
**Status:** First Reading
**As of:** 06/21/2023

**Principal Author(s):** LOONG, DON MUSTAPHA A.

**Co-Author(s):** ALAMIA, LAISA M., LOONG, BENJAMIN T., AMPATUAN, BAINTAN A., MITMUG, RASOL Y., JR., MAWALLIL, AMILBAHAR S., AMBOLODTO, SUHARTO M., ISMAEL, RASUL E., LIM, JOHN ANTHONY L., HASSAN, HATIMIL E., CANDAO, BAI MALEIHA B., ORANON, SUWAIB L., AMENODEN, ABDULAZIZ M., ALIH, EDDIE M., MIDTIMBANG, TAWAKAL B., MAGLANGIT, TARHATA M., PANGANDAMAN, NABILA MARGARITA P., MIDTIMBANG, MICHAEL E., LORENA, JOSE I., MISUARI, ABDULKARIM T., MISUARI, NURREDHA I., ESTINO, MATARUL M., PIANG, RAMON A., SR., MENDOZA, FROILYN T., HADJI ABDULLAH, KHALID M., UY-OYOD, SITTIE FAHANIE S., UTTO, BASSIR D., MUÑOZ, HUSSEIN P., ALI, IBRAHIM D., PARCASIO, RANDOLPH C., ANAYATIN, SUSANA S., JAKILAN, MUSLIMIN A., SANGKI, ALI B., ASNAWIE, DAN S., ABAS, AKMAD I., ABU, MUDJIB C., ALAUDDIN, MOSBER E., MALIK, HAMID U.

## Legislative History

Filed – 5/10/2023
First Reading – 6/21/2023

## Documents

- [Filed Copy (PDF)](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/Bill-No.-171-MP-Don-Mustapha-Loong-MANDATING-THE-INTEGRATION-OF-BANGSAMORO-AND-INDIGENOUS-PEOPLES-CULTURE-TRADITIONS-CUSTOMS-AND-BELIEFS-IN-THE-SECONDARY-EDUCATION-CURRICULUM.pdf)

---

*Source: [https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills-22/an-act-mandating-the-integration-of-bangsamoro-and-indigenous-peoples-culture-traditions-customs-and-beliefs-in-the-secondary-education-curriculum-of-all-public-and-private-educational-inst/](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills-22/an-act-mandating-the-integration-of-bangsamoro-and-indigenous-peoples-culture-traditions-customs-and-beliefs-in-the-secondary-education-curriculum-of-all-public-and-private-educational-inst/)*

## Full Text

============================================================
PAGE 1
============================================================
ae
FPF OWAN DU BWHN B

Sepa ERE EYVOOW HWW WWWWHNN HN NYP Be ee ee
ao ul WNRrROWOWN HDUABRPWNHR ODOHOWANDUBWNHRODOWO AN DU BW ND

Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY

Cotabato City
Bangsamoro Autono:nous Region in Mustim Mindan
BTA PARLIAMENT ; Parliament
Second Regular Session ILLS AND INDEX DIVISION
= ne Ve ED
Parliament Bill No.1 7 14 nen ignatures
Authored by

MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE

Co-authored by
MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Benjamin T. Loong, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol
Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Atty.
John Anthony L. Lim, Hatimil E. Hassan, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, Suwaib L. Oranon,
Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Eddie M. Alih, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Tarhata M. Maglangit,
Nabila Margarita P. Pangandaman, Michael E. Midtimbang, Atty. Jose I. Lorena,
Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Nurredha I. Misuari, Matarul M. Estino, and Ramon A. Piang Sr.

AN ACT
MANDATING THE INTEGRATION OF BANGSAMORO AND INDIGENOUS
PEOPLES’ CULTURE, TRADITIONS, CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CURRICULUM OF ALL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN BARMM, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

EXPLANATORY NOTE

The Bangsamoro region is home to various ethnic groups such as 7Jausug, Meranao,
Maguindanaon, Iranun, Yakan, Sama, Badjao, Jama Mapun, Kagan/Kalagan, Kalibugan, Sangil,
Molbog, Palawanon, Teduray, Lambangian, Manobo Dulangan, Visaya, Tagalog, and
Chinese who have their own unique traditions and practices.

On the other hand, Article [X, Section 24 of R.A. No. 11054, otherwise known as the
Bangsamoro Organic Law states that the Bangsamoro government shall preserve the history,
culture, arts, traditions, and the rich cultural heritage of the Bangsamoro people and their
Sultanates, such as those of Sulu, Maguindanao, Kabuntalan, Buayan, the Royal House of Ranao
and of the Iranun, and the non-Moro indigenous peoples of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.


============================================================
PAGE 2
============================================================
O ON DU BPWYN

bE
Re ©

12
13
14
1S
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Pe

In preserving and transmitting culture, education plays a vital role. It is through education
that cultural knowledge and values are passed on from one generation to the next. Education helps
to pass on the traditions and customs of a culture, as well as the language and other forms of
communication used to express cultural identity. It also provides opportunities for individuals to
learn about and appreciate the customs, beliefs, and values of other cultures. Education can help
people to understand the importance of preserving their cultural heritage and the necessity of
sharing it with others. Education makes culture more concrete and real. It socializes an individual
on the one hand, and it preserves, transmits, and promotes the culture of a society on the other.

In order to fulfill the mandate of preserving the history, culture, arts, traditions, and rich
cultural heritage of the Bangsamoro people, which is the basis of the creation of an autonomous
region, a separate subject for Bangsamoro and Indigenous People’s Culture, Traditions, Customs
and Beliefs will be integrated in the secondary education curriculum of all public and private
educational institutions in BARMM.

For these reasons, this representation earnestly asks for the approval of the bill.

A A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE
ngsamoro Transition Authdoyity

Member of the Parlixment — Bi


============================================================
PAGE 3
============================================================
a
FP O WO ON DOU HW NY KF

NNNPRP RP RP RP RP PPB
NYyOrF OVO On DWI BW DN

WNN NNN DN N
CMO WAN DW HB W

Ww
ram

32
33

34
a5
36
37
38

39
40

Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY

Cotabato City
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Nusiim Mindanao
BTA PARLIAMENT ws Partiament
Second Regular Session US SAND IRDEX DIVISION
Parliament Bill No. 1 7 1 name fA DTI sicnaury
Authored by

MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE

Co-authored by
MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Benjamin T. Loong, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol
Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Atty.
John Anthony L. Lim, Hatimil E. Hassan, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, Suwaib L. Oranon,
Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Eddie M. Alih, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Tarhata M. Maglangit,
Nabila Margarita P. Pangandaman, Michael E. Midtimbang, Atty. Jose I. Lorena,
Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Nurredha I. Misuari, Matarul M. Estino, and Ramon A. Piang Sr.

AN ACT
MANDATING THE INTEGRATION OF BANGSAMORO AND INDIGENOUS
PEOPLES’ CULTURE, TRADITIONS, CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CURRICULUM OF ALL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN BARMM, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament in session assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the “Bangsamoro Culture Studies
Act of 2023”.

SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy. — Article IX, Section 24 of R.A. No. 11054, otherwise
known as the Bangsamoro Organic Law states that the Bangsamoro government shall preserve the
history, culture, arts, traditions and the rich cultural heritage of the Bangsamoro people and their
Sultanates, such as those of Sulu, Maguindanao, Kabuntalan, Buayan, the Royal House of Ranao
and of the Iranun, and the non-Moro indigenous peoples of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

Article IX, Section 4 of the same organic law states that the customs, beliefs, and traditions of the
Bangsamoro people are hereby recognized, protected, and guaranteed. The Parliament shall adopt


============================================================
PAGE 4
============================================================
uo

© ON OD

12
12

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Ps
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
3/
38
39
40
41

measures to ensure mutual respect and protection of the distinct beliefs, customs, and traditions of
the Bangsamoro people and the other inhabitants in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

Thus, it is hereby declared a policy of the Bangsamoro Government to fulfill the said provision by
integrating education on Bangsamoro culture, traditions, customs, and beliefs in the secondary
education curriculum in all public and private educational institutions in BARMM.

SECTION 3. Bangsamoro Culture, Traditions, Customs, and Beliefs Course.— A
subject on the Bangsamoro culture, traditions, customs, and beliefs shall be included and integrated
into the curriculum of secondary education in all public and private schools in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

The Ministry of Basic, Higher, and Technical Education is hereby authorized and directed to adopt
measures to implement and carry out the provisions of this section, including the writing and
printing of appropriate primers, readers, and textbooks.

SECTION 4. Course Objectives. - The Bangsamoro culture, traditions, customs, and
beliefs subject shall be designed to:

(1) Inculcate the sense of patriotism as embodied by Bangsamoro people, important events,
and liberation movements and revolutions;

(2) Raise the level of awareness and understanding of the Bangsamoro history;

(3) Instill the rich heritage of the local Islamic Sultanates and ensure the transfer of cultural
knowledge;

(4) Emphasize necessary points such as local history, ethnicity, and culture;

(5) Include the history, culture, and identity of the Bangsamoro People and Indigenous
People;

(6) Expose students to different sources on Bangsamoro history, such as biographies,
interpretive and analytical texts, and journals, and spur student’s critical evaluation
thereof:

(7) Promote the cultural heritage of the Bangsamoro region and imbibe cultural awareness
and consciousness among students;

(8) Enable critical thinking and discourse on the effects and relevance of Bangsamoro
historical events, persons, and movements to the present; and

(9) Understand the Bangsamoro’s roots grounded on facts and strong historical tradition,
patriotism, custom, beliefs and identity.


============================================================
PAGE 5
============================================================
COND UN HPWN

10

11
12
13

14
15
16

17
18

19

20

21

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
33
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

SECTION 5. Bangsamoro Culture, Traditions, Customs, and Beliefs Training for
Teachers, — The training of teachers in carrying out the Bangsamoro culture, traditions, customs,
and beliefs course shall be incorporated into the teacher education and training programs.

SECTION 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within ninety (90) days from the
approval of this Act, the MBHTE shall, in consultation with other concerned government agencies,
experts, teachers, historians, and other stakeholders, promulgate rules and regulations necessary to
implement this Act.

SECTION 7. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this
Act shall be included in the Bangsamoro Appropriations Act.

SECTION 8. Repealing Clause. — All regional laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations,
other issuances, or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 9. Separability Clause.- If any provision of this Act is declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other parts or provisions not
affected thereby shall continue to remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 10. Effectivity. - This act shall take effect fifteen days (15) after its complete
publication in at least two (2) regional newspapers of general circulation.

APPROVED,

Co-author

HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA
HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG
HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN

HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG


============================================================
PAGE 6
============================================================
OW ON DU PWN

WWWWWWWNNNNNNNNHNNNHRP RPP RP RP BPP PRB
DUOKBWNPFPOWWANAUBWNHHROWAWANDUBWNHHO

Sf
38
39
40
41
42
43

45
46

HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL

HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO
HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL

HON. MP ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM
HON. MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN

HON. MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO

HON. MP SUWAIB L. ORANON

HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN

HON. MP EDDIE M. ALIH

HON. MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG

HON. MP TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT

HON. MP NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN
HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG

HON. MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA

HON. MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI

HON. MP NURREDHA I. MISUARI

HON. MP MATARUL M. ESTINO

HON. MP RAMON A. PIANG SR.

Certified Correct:
PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL
Secretary General
Attested by:

HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG
Speaker
