# BTA Parliament Bill No. 368

**AN ACT GRANTING SPECIAL HARDSHIP ALLOWANCE FOR TEACHERS IN THE ISLAND PROVINCES OF BASILAN, SULU, AND TAWI-TAWI AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREOF**

---

**Parliament:** BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2
**Bill Number:** 368
**Status:** Second Reading (Committee Stage)
**As of:** 01/27/2026

**Principal Author(s):** HATAMAN, ABRAR J.

**Co-Author(s):** BAYAM, ZULFIKAR-ALI S., MENDOZA, FROILYN T., GAYAK, AMIRODDIN Y., BENITO, ABDULBASIT R., ANAYATIN, SUSANA S., ABAS, AKMAD I., ABAS, HARON M., ASNAWIE, DAN S., CUTAN, UTTOH SALEM D., HASSAN, HATIMIL E.

## Legislative History

Filed – 6/24/2025
First Reading – 6/26/2025 (Resumption)
Referred to the Committee on Basic, Higher, and Technical Education, Committee on Finance, Budget and Management – 1/27/2026 (Resumption)

## Documents

- [Filed Copy (PDF)](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/06/Bill-No.-368-Enhanced-MP-Abrar-J.-Hataman.pdf)

---

*Source: [https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills-22/an-act-granting-special-hardship-allowance-for-teachers-in-the-island-provinces-of-basilan-sulu-and-tawi-tawi-and-appropriating-funds-thereof/](https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/bta-bills-22/an-act-granting-special-hardship-allowance-for-teachers-in-the-island-provinces-of-basilan-sulu-and-tawi-tawi-and-appropriating-funds-thereof/)*

## Full Text

============================================================
PAGE 1
============================================================
EMG

Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Cotabato City

Second Parliament Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
Fourth Regular Session Parliament

, ee

Private Member Bill No. 3 6 8

~ Principal Author: MP Abrar Jainuddin Hataman

AN ACT GRANTING SPECIAL HARDSHIP ALLOWANCE FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS IN THE
ISLAND PROVINCES OF BASILAN, SULU, AND TAWI-TAWI AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREOF

EXPLANATORY NOTE

Public school teachers play a fundamental role in society as they shape the lives of the
Bangsamoro learners and mold the thinkers of tomorrow. Their dedication in educating students is
crucial for societal progress of the island provinces of Basilan, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi. However, their
work is often challenged by a range of hardships that stem from geographic isolation, lack of
resources, and socio-economic constraints even to the extent of risking their own lives.

This proposed measure seeks to recognize the dedication of public school teachers in
educating Bangsamoro students by institutionalizing the grant of special hardship allowance to all
covered public school teachers serving in far-flung areas and remote islands in the provinces of
Basilan, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi. This bill aims to acknowledge the heroism of public school teachers by
providing them the compensation they deserve.

To support them effectively, the government must invest more in infrastructure, provide
adequate allowances, and create policies that prioritize the well-being and development of educators
in remote regions. Let us not deprive our public school teachers of this benefit by considering the
passing of this bill at the earliest possible time. ¢

AB J. HATAMAN


============================================================
PAGE 2
============================================================
tvtime

Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY

Cotabato City
Second P arian Bangsamero Autononots Reoton in Muslim Mindanao
Fourth Regular Session Parlicinent

Private Member Bill No.3 6 8 FP DIGETIY
aie Name; Signature:
Bate: Time: :

Principal Author: MP Abrar Jainuddin Hataman

AN ACT GRANTING SPECIAL HARDSHIP ALLOWANCE FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS IN THE
ISLAND PROVINCES OF BASILAN, SULU, AND TAWI-TAWI AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREOF

Section 1. Declaration of Policy.

It is hereby anchored on the policy of the State to protect and improve the welfare and economic
status of public school teachers by providing them with additional compensation through the special
hardship allowance by taking into account the nature of their roles and responsibilities and exposure
to possible dangers pertaining to their positions by serving in far-flung areas.

Section 2. Definition of Terms.
For the purposes of this bill, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

Special Hardship Allowances refers to allowances equivalent to at least twenty-five per cent of the
monthly salary of public school teachers who are exposed to hardship such as difficulty in commuting
to the place of work or other hazards peculiar to the place of employment.

Alternative Learning System refers to a parallel learning system in the Philippines that provides a
practical option to the existing formal instruction. When one does not have or cannot access formal
education in schools, ALS is considered as an alternate or substitute learning paradigm. It also
includes both the non-formal and informal sources of knowledge and skills.

Hardship Index (HI) refers to any number from 0 to 1 representing the degree of hardship of a
particular school combining all the variables identified as hardship factors: time and cost of
transportation from school to Schools Division Office (SDO), human violence, availability of
temporary learning spaces, level of poverty, and access to basic amenities. It is important to note that
the closer the value of the index to 1, the higher the degree of difficulty of the school situation.


============================================================
PAGE 3
============================================================
Hardship Post refers to a workstation located in an area characterized by extraordinarily hard,
uncomfortable, and extreme difficulties based on the hardship factors measured by the HI. The
difficulty experienced by teachers in schools has evolved over time, providing the Impetus for
Including other important factors that affect the recruitment and retention of teachers in hard-to-
reach areas.

Multigrade (MG) Teacher refers to a teacher handling a combined class of two or more grade levels,
often in remote or rural areas where resources are limited. Pure MG School refers to a school that
solely offers combined classes of two or more grade levels except for Kindergarten.

School Head refers to a person responsible for the administrative and Instructional supervision of
the school or duster of schools.

Teacher refers to an individual engaged in classroom teaching.

Mobile Teachers refers to ALS (Alternative Learning System) teachers who work in remote areas,
often in rural barangays, to provide education to out-of-school youth and adults.

Section 3. Coverage.

The following school personnel in the island provinces of Basilan, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi are qualified
to receive the Special Hardship Allowance:

a. All teachers in elementary and secondary schools located in the island provinces of Basilan,
Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi;
All teachers in hardship posts as determined through the Hardship Index;

c. Multi-grade teachers In pure multi-grade schools;
Mobile Teachers and Non-Formal Education or Alternative Learning System (ALS)
coordinators concurrently handling ALS classes; and

e. School heads that are assigned in hardship posts or pure multi-grade schools.

All qualified recipients shall receive the SHA amounting to twenty-five percent (25%) of their
monthly salary for a period of ten (10) months for every fiscal year, which shall be released on a
quarterly basis.

Section 4. Funding.

An interim budget for Fiscal Year 2025 shall be proportionately appropriated from the savings of the
Bangsamoro Government, Department of Education (DepEd) and the Ministry of Basic, Higher and
Technical Education (MBHTE). Thereafter, the funds necessary to carry out the provision of this act shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act of the Bangsamoro.


============================================================
PAGE 4
============================================================
Section 5. Implementing Rules and Regulations.

The Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, in consultation with the Department of
Education and Ministry of Basic, Higher and Technical Education (MBHTE), shall promulgate the
necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

Section 6. Repealing Clause.

Any law, presidential decree or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction, administrative order,
rule or regulation contrary to, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act is hereby repealed,
modified or amended accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity Clause.

This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) national newspapers
or the Official Gazette for general circulation.
