# Republic Act No. 983

**An Act Amending Section Four of Republic Act Numbered Three Hundred Nine**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 983
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1954/ra_983_1954.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 983**
>
> **An Act Amending Section Four of Republic Act Numbered Three Hundred Nine**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section four of Republic Act Numbered Three hundred nine is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 4. *Racing Days.* -Private individual and entitles duly licensed by the Commission on Races may hold horse races on Sundays not reserved under this Act, on twenty-four Saturdays as may be determined by the said Commission, and on legal holidays, except Thursday and Friday of Holy Week, July fourth, commonly known as Independence Day, and December thirteenth, commonly known as Rizal Day. The second Sunday and the first Saturday afternoon of each month shall be reserved for races held by the Philippine Anti-Tuberculosis Society. The fourth Sunday of February, April, June, August, October and the third Sunday of December shall be reserved for races held by the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office. The fourth Sunday of January, May, July, and September and the second Saturday afternoon on January, April, July and October shall be reserved for races held by the White Cross, Inc. The fourth Sunday on March shall also be reserved for the national race, commonly known as the Grand Derby Race, held by the Philippine Anti-Tuberculosis Society. Other Saturday afternoons shall be reserved for races authorized by the President of the Philippines for charitable, relief or civic purposes. All racing days hereinabove listed and assigned to private individuals and entitles duly licensed by the Games and Amusements Board shall be apportioned and distributed equally each year among existing racing clubs or race tracks duly authorized to conduct horse races: *Provided, However,* That the charitable institutions concerned shall receive an amount guarantee from the Philippine Racing Club, Inc. or the Manila Jockey Club, Inc., where the races may be held, based on the average income received by the said charitable institutions from the Manila Jockey Club, Inc., for a period of twelve months immediately preceding the races to be held , and that this amount-guarantee shall be deposited in cash or certified check by the corresponding racing club with the Games and Amusements Board two days immediately prior to the holding of any such charity races."
>
> **Section 2.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: May 29, 1954.
>
>
>
