# Republic Act No. 4889

**An Act Amending Article Twenty-Two of Republic Act Numbered Three Hundred Eighty-Seven Otherwise Known as the "Petroleum Act of 1949"**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 4889
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1967/ra_4889_1967.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 4889**
>
> An Act Amending Article Twenty-Two of Republic Act Numbered Three Hundred Eighty-Seven Otherwise Known as the "Petroleum Act of 1949"
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Article Twenty-two of Republic Act Numbered Three hundred eighty-seven is hereby amended to read as follows.
>
> > "Art. 22. *Easement over public land.*— When easement or right of temporal occupancy over public land is needed by a concessionaire for the purpose of carrying out any work essential to his operation under this Act, such right may be granted by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources with due regard to prior rights of third parties and subject to applicable laws and regulations.1avvphi1 The easement or temporary occupancy over public highways, roads and bridges by a concessionaire for the purpose of carrying out any work essential to his operations under this Act may be granted, upon such terms as may be deemed proper in the public interest, by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications who shall see to it that such easement or temporary occupancy shall cause the least inconvenience to the general public.
> >
> > "The presumption of necessity stated in article twenty-one applies likewise in this case."
>
> **Section 2.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 17, 1967.
>
>
>
