# Republic Act No. 4755

**An Act Creating the Municipality of Tarragona, Province of Davao**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 4755
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1966/ra_4755_1966.html)

---

> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 4755**
>
> An Act Creating the Municipality of Tarragona, Province of Davao
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Barrios Tarragona, Jovellar, Lucatan, Tagabakid, Ompao, Tubaon and Dadong, Municipality of Mati, Province of Davao, are hereby separated from said municipality, and constituted into a separate and distinct municipality to be known as the Municipality of Tarragona, same province.1avvphi1 The seat of government is Barrio Tarragona. The technical description of the said municipality is as follows, to wit: Bounded, beginning at point '1' on the south of Mayo River following the course of the said river upstream northwest direction, 11,400 m. to point '2'; thence, due West, 1,800 m. to point '3'; thence due North, 9,800 m. following the line of longitude 126º 15' to point '4'; thence, northwest following the boundary line of Mati and Lupon to point '5' (Mt. Mayo); thence northeast direction following the boundary line of Mati and Manay to point '6'; thence southeast direction following the shoreline of the Pacific Ocean and Mayo Bay to point of beginning,' containing an area of 37,100 hectares, more or less, bounded on the north line 5 by the Municipality of Manay; on the northeast line 6-7 by Quinono-on River; on the east and south by the Pacific Ocean and Mayo Bay; on the southwest line 1-4 by the Municipality of Mati; and on the northwest line 4-5 by the Municipality of Lupon.
>
> **Section 2.** The mayor, vice-mayor and the six councilors shall be elected and qualified in the next general elections in the year nineteen hundred sixty-seven.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved: June 18, 1966.
>
>
>
