# Republic Act No. 8301

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE TUBIG PUTIH EXTENSION HIGH SCHOOL/CLASS AT CAPUAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF LUUK, PROVINCE OF SULU, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE CAPUAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8301
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1997/ra_8301_1997.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8301, June 06, 1991 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE TUBIG PUTIH EXTENSION HIGH SCHOOL/CLASS AT CAPUAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF LUUK, PROVINCE OF SULU, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE CAPUAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Tubig Putih Extension High School/Class at Capual in the Municipality of Luuk, Province of Sulu, is hereby converted into a national high school to be known as the Capual National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports shall implement this Act so as to make the Capual National High School in operation for the first school term after the effectivity of this Act.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary for the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Luuk National High School in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on June 6, 1997 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1) Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
