# Republic Act No. 8201

**AN ACT CONSTITUTING THE ENGINEERING DISTRICTS IN THE PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR INTO FOUR SEPARATE AND DISTINCT ENGINEERING DISTRICTS, TO BE LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF RAGAY, CANAMAN, TIGAON AND BAAO, ALL IN THE PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8201
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1996/ra_8201_1996.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8201, June 22, 1996 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONSTITUTING THE ENGINEERING DISTRICTS IN THE PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR INTO FOUR SEPARATE AND DISTINCT ENGINEERING DISTRICTS, TO BE LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF RAGAY, CANAMAN, TIGAON AND BAAO, ALL IN THE PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The engineering districts in the Province of Camarines Sur shall be reconstituted, under the supervision of the Department of Public Works and Highways, into four (4) separate and distinct engineering districts. The four (4) engineering districts reconstituted herein, shall be located in the following municipalities: First Engineering District in Ragay; Second Engineering District in Canaman; Third Engineering District in Tigaon; and the Fourth Engineering District in Baao, Province of Camarines Sur.
>
> **Section 2.** The First Engineering District shall comprise the municipalities of Ragay, Del Gallego, Lupi, Sipocot, Libmanan, Cabusao, Pamplona, Pasacao, Minalabac, and San Fernando while the Second Engineering District shall comprise Naga City and the municipalities of Canaman, Bombon, Calabanga, Camaligan, Gainza, Magarao, Milaor, Ocampo, and Pili. The Third Engineering District shall comprise the municipalities of Caramoan, Garchitorena, Goa, Lagonoy, Presentacion, Sagñay, San Jose, Tigaon, Tinambac, and Siruma while the Fourth Engineering District shall comprise Iriga City and the municipalities of Baao, Balatan, Bato, Buhi, Bula, and Nabua.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The present personnel, resources and equipment of the present First and Second Engineering Districts shall be divided among the new engineering districts.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of Public Works and Highways shall issue the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, Lapsed into law on June 22, 1996, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
