# Republic Act No. 8312

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE LIGAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL EXTENSION CLASSES LOCATED IN BARANGAY BINODEGAHAN, MUNICIPALITY OF PIODURAN, PROVINCE OF ALBAY, FROM THE LIGAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND CONVERTING THE SAME INTO A SEPARATE AND INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE PIODURAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8312
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1997/ra_8312_1997.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8312, June 20, 1997 ]**
>
> AN ACT SEPARATING THE LIGAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL EXTENSION CLASSES LOCATED IN BARANGAY BINODEGAHAN, MUNICIPALITY OF PIODURAN, PROVINCE OF ALBAY, FROM THE LIGAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND CONVERTING THE SAME INTO A SEPARATE AND INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE PIODURAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Ligao National High School Extension Classes, located in Barangay Binodegahan, Municipality of Pioduran, Province of Albay, is hereby separated from the Ligao National High School and converted into a national high school to be known as the Pioduran National High School.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** All personnel records, assets, including buildings, sites and improvements thereon, funds and obligations of the Ligao National High School Extension Classes are hereby transferred to the Pioduran National High School.
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriation of the Ligao National High School - Binodegahan Extension Classes. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Pioduran National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on June 20, 1997 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27 (1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
