# Republic Act No. 8411

**AN ACT AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7364 BY CONVERTING THE ILOCOS REGIONAL HOSPITAL TO ILOCOS TRAINING AND REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER, FURTHER INCREASING ITS BED CAPACITY TO THREE HUNDRED BEDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8411
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1997/ra_8411_1997.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8411, November 27, 1997 ]**
>
> AN ACT AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7364 BY CONVERTING THE ILOCOS REGIONAL HOSPITAL TO ILOCOS TRAINING AND REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER, FURTHER INCREASING ITS BED CAPACITY TO THREE HUNDRED BEDS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Ilocos Regional Hospital in San Fernando, La Union shall be converted into a teaching and training medical center and shall thereafter be known as the Ilocos Training and Regional Medical Center.
>
> **Section 2.** The bed capacity of said Ilocos Medical Center is hereby increased from two hundred (200) to three (300) hundred beds.
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette.
>
> Approved, Lapsed into law on November 27, 1997, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
