# Republic Act No. 8171

**AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE REPATRIATION OF FILIPINO WOMEN WHO HAVE LOST THEIR PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP BY MARRIAGE TO ALIENS AND OF NATURAL-BORN FILIPINOS**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8171
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_8171_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 8171, July 03, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE REPATRIATION OF FILIPINO WOMEN WHO HAVE LOST THEIR PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP BY MARRIAGE TO ALIENS AND OF NATURAL-BORN FILIPINOS
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** Filipino women who have lost their Philippine citizenship by marriage to aliens and natural-born Filipinos who have lost their Philippine citizenship, including their minor children, on account of political or economic necessity, may reacquire Philippine citizenship through repatriation in the manner provided in Section 4 of Commonwealth Act No. 63, as amended: *Provided,* that the applicant is not a:
>
> 1. Person opposed to organized government or affiliated with any association or group of persons who uphold and teach doctrines opposing organized government;
>
> 2. Person defending or teaching the necessity or propriety of violence, personal assault, or association for the predominance of their ideas;
>
> 3. Person convicted of crimes involving moral turpitude; or
>
> 4. Person suffering from mental alienation or incurable contagious diseases.
>
> **Section 2.** Repatriation shall be effected by taking the necessary oath of allegiance to the Republic of the Philippines and registration in the proper civil registry and in the Bureau of Immigration. The Bureau of Immigration shall thereupon cancel the pertinent alien certificate of registration and issue the certificate of identification as Filipino citizen to the repatriated citizen.
>
> **Section 3.** All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect thirty (30) days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.1aшphi1
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO J. ANGARA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representative was finally passed by the House of Representatives and Senate on August 31, 1993 and February 21, 1995, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Lapsed into law on July 3, 1995 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
