# Republic Act No. 8142

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE SIMEON SUAN MEMORIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY PAG-ASA, MUNICIPALITY OF BANSUD, PROVINCE OF ORIENTAL MINDORO, INTO A VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE SIMEON SUAN VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL COLLEGE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8142
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_8142_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 8142, July 16, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE SIMEON SUAN MEMORIAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY PAG-ASA, MUNICIPALITY OF BANSUD, PROVINCE OF ORIENTAL MINDORO, INTO A VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE SIMEON SUAN VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL COLLEGE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Simeon Suan Memorial National High School in Barangay Pag-asa, Municipality of Bansud, Province of Oriental Mindoro, is hereby converted into a vocational and technical college, to be known as the Simeon Suan Vocational and Technical College and shall be under the supervision of the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA).
>
> **Section 2.** The TESDA shall take steps as may be necessary for the immediate implementation of this Act.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriation of the Simeon Suan Memorial National High School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO J. ANGARA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representative was finally passed by the House of Representatives and Senate on February 16, 1995 and February 15, 1995, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Lapsed into law on July 16, 1995 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
