# Republic Act No. 8019

**AN ACT UPGRADING THE EULOGIO RODRIGUEZ, SR. MEMORIAL HOSPITAL FROM A PROVINCIAL HOSPITAL TO A MEDICAL CENTER, RENAMING IT AS 'AMANG' RODRIGUEZ MEDICAL CENTER, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8019
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_8019_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 8019, May 25, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT UPGRADING THE EULOGIO RODRIGUEZ, SR. MEMORIAL HOSPITAL FROM A PROVINCIAL HOSPITAL TO A MEDICAL CENTER, RENAMING IT AS 'AMANG' RODRIGUEZ MEDICAL CENTER, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The status of the Eulogio Rodriguez, Sr. Memorial Hospital in the Municipality of Marikina, Metro Manila, is hereby upgraded from a provincial hospital to a medical center of the Department of Health. As such, the hospital shall be under the laws, rules and regulations governing the category of existing hospitals.
>
> **Section 2.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The hospital as a medical center shall participate in the training of doctors in their chosen field of expertise, nurses and paramedics. The conduct of research shall also be undertaken.
>
> **Section 4.** Henceforth, this hospital shall be named as 'Amang' Rodriguez Medical Center.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect immediately upon its approval and publication in the Official Gazette.
>
> Lapsed into law on May 25, 1995 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
