# Republic Act No. 8034

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE TACLOBAN CITY NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL-BASPER ANNEX IN BARANGAY BASPER, TACLOBAN CITY, FROM THE TACLOBAN CITY NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY BAGACAY, ALSO IN TACLOBAN CITY, AND CONVERTING IT INTO A SEPARATE AND INDEPENDENT NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE TACLOBAN NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8034
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_8034_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 8034, June 05, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT SEPARATING THE TACLOBAN CITY NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL-BASPER ANNEX IN BARANGAY BASPER, TACLOBAN CITY, FROM THE TACLOBAN CITY NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY BAGACAY, ALSO IN TACLOBAN CITY, AND CONVERTING IT INTO A SEPARATE AND INDEPENDENT NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE TACLOBAN NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Tacloban City National High School-Basper Annex in Barangay Basper, Tacloban City, is hereby separated from the Tacloban City National High School in Barangay Bagacay, also in Tacloban City, and converted into a separate and independent national agricultural school to be known as the Tacloban National Agricultural School.
>
> **Section 2.** The school shall offer agriculture secondary education proper to carry out its objectives.
>
> **Section 3.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** The title to and ownership of the land of the present Tacloban City National High School-Basper Annex located at Barangay Basper, Tacloban City, together with the two (2) school buildings thereon, shall automatically be transferred to the Tacloban National Agricultural School.
>
> **Section 5.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect immediately upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on June 5, 1995 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
