# Republic Act No. 8073

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL VOCATIONAL-TECHNICAL SECONDARY SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BULUSAN, PROVINCE OF SORSOGON, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8073
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_8073_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 8073, June 19, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL VOCATIONAL-TECHNICAL SECONDARY SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BULUSAN, PROVINCE OF SORSOGON, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established, under the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority, a national vocational-technical secondary school in the Municipality of Bulusan, Province of Sorsogon, to be known as the Bulusan National Vocational-Technical High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Bulusan National Vocational-Technical High School shall provide the following: (a) skills required by a labor-intensive, agriculture and rural based development; (b) skills for self-employment and entrepreneurship; (c) skills required by developing agro-industrial technologies such as crop and livestock production, food processing, farm management, farm mechanization, garment trades, electrical/electronics, mechanical automotive, welding fabrication, basic computer programming and other short-term non-formal or non-traditional courses.
>
> **Section 3.** The service areas of the Bulusan National Vocational-Technical High School shall cover the barangays of Dancalan, Upper/Lower San Jose, San Francisco, San Rafael, Mabuhay, Sabang, Sapngan, Central Proper, Dapdap, Poctol, Locban, Madlawon, Cogon, Lalud, Tinampo, San Bernardo, and San Antonio.
>
> **Section 4.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on June 19, 1995 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
