# Republic Act No. 8302

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE REBOKON NATIONALIZED BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY REBOKON, MUNICIPALITY OF DUMALINAO, PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR, INTO A NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE REBOKON AGRICULTURAL AND VOCATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8302
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1997/ra_8302_1997.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8302, June 06, 1997 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE REBOKON NATIONALIZED BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY REBOKON, MUNICIPALITY OF DUMALINAO, PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR, INTO A NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE REBOKON AGRICULTURAL AND VOCATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Rebokon Nationalized Barangay High School in Barangay Rebokon, Municipality of Dumalinao, Province of Zamboanga del Sur, is hereby converted into an agricultural school to be known as the Rebokon Agricultural and Vocational High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The School shall, in addition to its present secondary curriculum, offer agricultural, technical and other vocational subjects.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue the necessary rules and regulations for the conversion and operation of the school, and for the effective implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Rebokon Nationalized Barangay High School are transferred to and absorbed by the Rebokon Agricultural and Vocational High School.
>
> **Section 5.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Rebokon National High School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Rebokon Agricultural and Vocational High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on June 6, 1997 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27 (1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
