# Republic Act No. 8404

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE CABAGAN CENTRAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF CABAGAN, PROVINCE OF ISABELA, INTO A SCIENCE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE CABAGAN SCIENCE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8404
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1997/ra_8404_1997.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8404, November 22, 1997 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE CABAGAN CENTRAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF CABAGAN, PROVINCE OF ISABELA, INTO A SCIENCE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE CABAGAN SCIENCE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Cabagan Central School in the Municipality of Cabagan, Province of Isabela, is hereby converted into a science elementary school to be known as the Cabagan Science Elementary School.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall prescribe the curriculum and issue the rules and regulations necessary for the conversion of the Cabagan Central School into a science elementary school, taking into consideration the following:
>
> (1) The curricula for Grades I and VI shall be revised with emphasis in science, mathematics and communication arts.
>
> (2) Teachers for Grades I to VI shall be trained and reoriented on the new curriculum.
>
> (3) Instructional materials and facilities shall be revised and upgraded to conform with the new curriculum.
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Cabagan Central School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Cabagan Science Elementary School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, Lapsed into law on November 22, 1997, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
