# Republic Act No. 8136

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A TEN-BED CAPACITY MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JOSE, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE SAN JOSE MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8136
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_8136_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 8136, July 16, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT ESTABLISHING A TEN-BED CAPACITY MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JOSE, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE SAN JOSE MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established a ten-bed capacity municipal hospital in the Municipality of San Jose, Province of Surigao del Norte, to be known as the San Jose Municipal Hospital.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Health, in consultation and coordination with the local government officials concerned, shall promulgate the rules and regulations necessary for the establishment of the hospital.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law; thereafter, funds necessary for the maintenance and operation of the hospital shall be provided in accordance with the provisions the Local Government Code or the applicable law at the time.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO J. ANGARA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representative was finally passed by the House of Representatives and Senate on February 16, 19995 and February 15, 1995, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Lapsed into law on July 16, 1995 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
