# Republic Act No. 8143

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE SCHOOL OF FISHERIES IN LABASAN, BONGABONG, ORIENTAL MINDORO, INTO A COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE BONGABONG COLLEGE OF FISHERIES, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8143
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1995/ra_8143_1995.html)

---

> Nineth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 8143, July 16, 1995 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE SCHOOL OF FISHERIES IN LABASAN, BONGABONG, ORIENTAL MINDORO, INTO A COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE BONGABONG COLLEGE OF FISHERIES, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Bongabong School of Fisheries in Labasan, Bongabong, Oriental Mindoro, is hereby converted into a college to be known as the Bongabong College of Fisheries and shall be under the supervision of the Commission on Higher Education.
>
> **Section 2.** The Bongabong College of Fisheries shall, in addition to the secondary fishery curriculum and the three-year course leading to the diploma in fishery technology, offer degree programs in fishery, agriculture and other nondegree programs as may be necessary for the development of its service area.
>
> **Section 3.** The Bongabong College of Fisheries shall be headed by a vocational school superintendent who shall be appointed by the chairperson of the Commission on Higher Education.
>
> **Section 4.** In order not to disrupt the present administrative operations of the College, the incumbent vocational school administrator shall be the first vocational school superintendent and all its personnel shall be absorbed by the College, subject to civil service rules and regulations.
>
> **Section 5.** The Commission on Higher Education shall take steps as may be necessary for the immediate implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 6.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Bongabong School of Fisheries. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 7.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO J. ANGARA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA, JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representative was finally passed by the House of Representatives and Senate on February 16, 1995 and February 20, 1995, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **CAMILO L. SABIO** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Lapsed into law on July 16, 1995 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
