# Republic Act No. 8381

**AN ACT CONVERTING DUNGAWAN BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUINYANGAN, PROVINCE OF QUEZON, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE DUNGAWAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8381
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1997/ra_8381_1997.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8381, November 13, 1997 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING DUNGAWAN BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUINYANGAN, PROVINCE OF QUEZON, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE DUNGAWAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The present Dungawan Barangay High School in the Municipality of Guinyangan, Province of Quezon, is hereby converted into a national high school to be known as the Dungawan National High School.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** The said national high school shall provide secondary education, training and instructions primarily to pupils residing in the adjacent barangays of Dungawan, Mabini, Sta. Teresita, San Lorenzo, Villa Hiwasayan Sta. Maria, all in Municipality of Guinyangan, and Pisipis in the Municipality of Lopez, Quezon, but it shall not refuse to admit qualified pupils residing elsewhere in the district.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** All personnel, assets, liabilities, and records of the Dungawan Barangay High School are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Dungawan National High School.
>
> **Section 5.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **ERNESTO M. MACEDA** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **JOSE DE VENECIA JR.** Secretary of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 24, 1989 and September 22, 1989, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **LORENZO E. LEYNES, JR.** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **ROBERTO P. NAZARENO** Secretary General of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> Lapsed into law on November 13, 1997 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27(1) of the Constitution.
>
>
>
