# Republic Act No. 8402

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE MARSMAN BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STO. TOMAS, PROVINCE OF DAVAO, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE MARSMAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 8402
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1997/ra_8402_1997.html)

---

> Tenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8402, November 22, 1997 ]**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE MARSMAN BARANGAY HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STO. TOMAS, PROVINCE OF DAVAO, INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS THE MARSMAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The Marsman Barangay High School in the Municipality of Sto. Tomas, Province of Davao, is converted into a national high school, to be known as the Marsman National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Marsman Barangay High School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Marsman National High School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Lapsed into law on November 22, 1997 without the President's signature, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.
>
>
>
