# Executive Order No. 122

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE BALABAC PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 122
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2012/eo_122_2012.html)

---

> MALACAÑAN PALACE
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 122
>
> DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE BALABAC PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)
>
> WHEREAS, the Port of Balabac in Balabac, Palawan is one of the busiest ports in the country;
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is an urgent need to accelerate the development of a seaport in the Municipality of Balabac which will serve as the gateway of Balabac and Southern Palawan areas to the rest of the country and nearby countries of Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, Indonesia and others; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to accommodate projected increase in port traffic and program the development of the port facilities to support the increasing demands of shipping trade within the region.
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO Ill, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** Port of Balabac. The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Balabac situated in Barangay Poblacion, Municipality of Balabac, Province of Palawan, is hereby delineated and established, particularly described as follows:
>
> Beginning at a point marked 1 on the plan, thence:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | DUE EAST | | | | 4,160.00 m. | to point 2; |
> | DUE SOUTH | | | | 8,500.00 m. | to point 3; |
> | DUE WEST | | | | 3,400.00 m. | to point 4; |
> | DUE NORTH | | | | 1,200.00 m. | to point 5; |
> | DUE WEST | | | | 2,450.00 m. | to point 6; |
> | DUE NORTH | | | | 500.00 m. | to point 7; |
> | N. | 73 deg. | 00' | E., | 2,500.00 m. | to point 8; |
> | DUE NORTH | | | | 3,500.00 m. | to point 9; |
> | DUE WEST | | | | 700.00 m. | to point 10; |
> | DUE NORTH | | | | 2,570.00 m. | to point of beginning, |
>
> Containing a total area of THIRTY-THREE MILLION ONE HUNDRED NINETY-NINE THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED SEVEN SQUARE METERS AND FIFTY-SEVEN SQUARE DECIMETERS (33,199,907.57), more or less.
>
> **SECTION 2.** *PPA Jurisdiction.* The Balabac Port Zone, as delineated, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the PPA, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development and utilization of the port.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Repeal.* All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Separability.* If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
>
> **SECTION 5.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 21st of December, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
