# Executive Order No. 86

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE HINIGARAN PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 86
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2012/eo_86_2012.html)

---

> MALACAÑAN PALACE
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 86
>
> DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE HINIGARAN PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)
>
> WHEREAS, the Port of Hinigaran in Hinigaran, Negros Occidental is one of the major and busiest ports in the country; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to delineate the Port Zone of Hinigaran for the development of the necessary port facilities to support the demands of the shipping trade within the region.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** *Port of Hinigaran.* The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Hinigaran situated in the Municipality of Hinigaran, Province of Negros Occidental, is hereby delineated, particularly described as follows:
>
> Beginning at a point marked 1 on the plan, being N. 83 deg. 41’03.9? E., 93.302 m. from LEICA GPS Control Station (HINI-1), thence:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | S. | 82 deg. | 52’14.6? | W., | 81.457 m. | to point 2; |
> | S. | 12 deg. | 41’10.8? | E., | 53.665 m. | to point 3; |
> | S. | 08 deg. | 39’22.0? | E., | 65.117 m. | to point 4; |
> | S. | 07 deg. | 52’18.3? | E., | 382.053 m. | to point 5; |
> | S. | 82 deg. | 07’41.7? | W., | 1,000.000 m. | to point 6; |
> | N. | 07 deg. | 52’18.3? | W., | 1,020.869 m. | to point 7; |
> | N. | 82 deg. | 56’54.9? | E., | 1,181.892 m. | to point 8; |
> | S. | 04 deg. | 46’01.5? | W., | 393.467 m. | to point 9; |
> | S. | 01 deg. | 22’59.8? | W., | 122.020 m. | to point of beginning, |
> 1âwphi1
>
> containing an area of ONE MILLION SEVENTY-SEVEN THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED THIRTEEN SQUARE METERS AND SEVEN HUNDRED NINETY-NINE SQUARE DECIMETERS (1,077,313.799), more or less.
>
> **SECTION 2.** *PPA Jurisdiction.* The Hinigaran Port Zone, as delineated, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the PPA, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development and utilization of the port.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Repeal.* All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Separability.* If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
>
> **SECTION 5.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
