# Executive Order No. 85

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE HIMAMAYLAN PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 85
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2012/eo_85_2012.html)

---

> MALACAÑAN PALACE
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 85
>
> DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE HIMAMAYLAN PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)
>
> WHEREAS, the Port of Himamaylan in Himamaylan City, Negros Occidental is one of the major and busiest ports in the country; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to delineate the Port Zone of Himamaylan for the development of the necessary port facilities to support the demands of the shipping trade within the region.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** Port of Himamaylan. The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Himamaylan situated in Barangay Aguisan, City of Himamaylan, Province of Negros Occidental, is hereby delineated, particularly described as follows:
>
> Beginning at a point marked 1 on the plan, being N. 84 deg. 15’26.4? E., 19.968 m. from LEICA GPS Control Station (HIMA-1), thence:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | S. | 32 deg. | 29’26.2? | W., | 6.026 m. | to point 2; |
> | S. | 07 deg. | 24’36.4? | W., | 45.349 m. | to point 3; |
> | S. | 10 deg. | 21’01.7? | E., | 453.825 m. | to point 4; |
> | S. | 79 deg. | 38’58.3? | W., | 1,000.000 m. | to point 5; |
> | N. | 10 deg. | 33’01.9? | W., | 1,051.265 m. | to point 6; |
> | N. | 80 deg. | 42’49.9? | E., | 1,009.596 m. | to point 7; |
> | N. | 08 deg. | 28’11.1? | E., | 502.855 m. | to point 8; |
> | S. | 04 deg. | 29’34.1? | E., | 16.552 m. | to point 9; |
> | N. | 81 deg. | 47’11.5? | E., | 31.926 m. | to point 10; |
> | S. | 02 deg. | 18’10.8? | E., | 10.941 m. | to point of beginning, |
>
> containing an area of ONE MILLION FORTY-TWO THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED FIFTY-EIGHT SQUARE METERS AND EIGHT HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVEN SQUARE DECIMETERS (1,042,958.867), more or less.1âwphi1
>
> **SECTION 2.** PPA Jurisdiction. The Himamaylan Port Zone, as delineated, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the PPA, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the government; implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development and utilization of the port.
>
> **SECTION 3.** Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** Separability. If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
>
> **SECTION 5.** Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 1st of October, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
