# Executive Order No. 98

**PROMULGATING THE NINTH REGULAR FOREIGN INVESTMENT NEGATIVE LIST**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 98
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2012/eo_98_2012.html)

---

> MALACAÑAN PALACE
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 98
>
> PROMULGATING THE NINTH REGULAR FOREIGN INVESTMENT NEGATIVE LIST
>
> WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 7042, also known as the “Foreign Investments Act of 1991,” as amended by RA 8179, provides for the formulation of a Regular Foreign Investment Negative List, covering investment areas/activities which may be opened to foreign investors and/or reserved to Filipino nationals; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to formulate the Ninth Regular Foreign Investment Negative List, replacing the Eight Regular Foreign Investment Negative List, to reflect changes to List A pursuant to existing laws and upon recommendation of concerned agencies.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** *Ninth Regular Foreign Investment Negative List.* Only the investment areas and/or activities listed in the Annex hereof shall be reserved to Philippine nationals, and hereafter shall be referred to as the Ninth Regular Foreign Investment Negative List. The extent of foreign equity participation in these areas shall be limited to the percentages indicated in the List.
>
> **SECTION 2.** *Amendments.* Amendments to List A may be made at any time to reflect changes instituted in specific laws while amendments to List B shall not be made more often than once every two years, pursuant to Section 8 of RA 7042, as amended, and its revised implementing rules and regulations.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Repeal.* All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Separability.* If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
>
> **SECTION 5.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 29th day of October, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
