# Executive Order No. 94

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE BALBAGON PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 94
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2012/eo_94_2012.html)

---

> MALACAÑAN PALACE
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 94
>
> DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE BALBAGON PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)
>
> WHEREAS, the Port of Balbagon in Mambajao, Camiguin is one of the major and busiest ports in the country; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to delineate the Port Zone of Balbagon for the development of the necessary port facilities to support the demands of the shipping trade within the region.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** *Port of Balbagon.* The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Balbagon situated in Barangay Balbagon, Municipality of Mambajao, Province of Camiguin, is hereby delineated, particularly described as follows:
>
> Beginning at a point marked 1 on the plan, being S. 72 deg. 08' E., 2,515.13 m. from BLLM No. 1, CAD 473, Mambajao Cadastre, thence:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | N. | 48 deg. | 32' | W., | 18.31 m. | to point 2; |
> | N. | 44 deg. | 14' | E., | 30.42 m. | to point 3; |
> 1âwphi1| N. | 48 deg. | 30' | W., | 81.20 m. | to point 4; |
> | N. | 52 deg. | 35' | W., | 76.15 m. | to point 5; |
> | N. | 47 deg. | 00' | E., | 500.00 m. | to point 6; |
> | S. | 43 deg. | 00' | E., | 385.00 m. | to point 7; |
> | S. | 46 deg. | 47' | W., | 466.22 m. | to point 8; |
> | N. | 52 deg. | 19' | W., | 70.35 m. | to point 9; |
> | N. | 44 deg. | 23' | W., | 125.41 m. | to point 10; |
> | S. | 46 deg. | 29' | W., | 25.70 m. | to point 11; |
> | N. | 43 deg. | 02' | W., | 3.28 m. | to point 12; |
> | N. | 50 deg. | 50' | W., | 13.43 m. | to point of beginning, |
>
> containing an area of ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-SIX THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED FIFTY-NINE (186,859.00) SQUARE METERS, more or less.
>
> **SECTION 2.** *PPA Jurisdiction.* The Balbagon Port Zone, as delineated, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the PPA, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development and utilization of the port.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Repeal.* All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Separability.* If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
>
> **SECTION 5.** *Effectively.* This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
