# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 65

**EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON TAGAYTAY-TAAL TO DECEMBER 31, 2001**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 65
- **Date**: December 26, 2001
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2001/eo_65_2001.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 65, December 26, 2001 ]
>
> EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON TAGAYTAY-TAAL TO DECEMBER 31, 2001
>
> WHEREAS, the Presidential Commission on Tagaytay-Taal (PCTT) was precipitately abolished pursuant to the provisions of Executive Order No. 327 dated December 9, 2000;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the PCTT was not accorded sufficient period to wind-up its affairs and prepare for the final disposition of its personnel, assets and liabilities;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the abruptness of PCTT’s abolition deprived its employees time to look for other employment opportunities or to transfer to other government offices;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO** , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the activation of the Presidential Commission on Tagaytay-Taal and the extension of its term to December 31, 2001.
>
> The PCTT shall effect an orderly transfer of its assets, liabilities, records, appropriations, facilities and equipment to the Department of Environment and Natural Resources in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations.
>
> Funds for the implementation of this Order, inclusive of personnel benefits requirements, shall be sourced from agency savings, by realignment of funds or, upon request, augmented by the Department of Budget and Management from any available source, subject to budgetary rules and regulations.
>
> This Order supercedes Executive Order No. 327 dated December 9, 2000.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of Dec., in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand One.
>
> (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
