Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

**EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION**

**RESOLUTION NO. 112**

Introduced by:

**MP ENGR. AIDA M. SILONGAN**
**MP ATTY. MARY ANN M. ARNADO**
**MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**
**MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL**
**MP EDDIE M. ALIH**

Co-Authors:

**MP SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA ALBA, MP. MOHAGHER M. IQBAL, MP. TAWAKAL MIDTIMBANG, MP. ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN, MP IBRAHIM D. ALI, MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MP RAISSA H. JAJURIE, MP ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN, MP RAMON A. PIANG, MP UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP MUDJIB C. ABU, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP MATARUL M. ESTINO, and MP LANANG ALI, JR.**

**A RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE SINCERE APPRECIATION AND GRATITUDE OF THE BANGSAMORO TO VICE- PRESIDENT SARA “INDAY SARA” DUTERTE-CARPIO FOR PROVIDING DISASTER RELIEF AND ASSISTANCE TO THE PEOPLE OF THE BANGSAMORO WHO SUFFERED CATASTROPHIC DAMAGE CAUSED BY SEVERE TROPICAL STORM PAENG**

**WHEREAS,** on October 26, 2022, a severe tropical storm known as Paeng (international name: Nalgae) hit the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM), resulting in significant destruction, loss of life, and damage to agriculture and critical infrastructure due to flooding, sea surge, and landslides.

**WHEREAS,** according to the Bangsamoro Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (BDRRMC), Severe Tropical Storm Paeng affected at least 570,285 individuals in the region, with 53 fatalities, 12 missing persons, and 38 injured persons.

**WHEREAS,** Severe Tropical Storm Paeng damaged 371 houses and partially damaged 480 others in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM). The storm also caused significant damage to infrastructure and agriculture, with estimated losses of around PHP 585,602,426.33;

**WHEREAS,** on 29 October 2022, Bangsamoro Chief Minister Ahod Ebrahim declared a state of calamity in the Bangsamoro Region due to the widespread damage and destruction brought about by Severe Tropical Storm Paeng;

**WHEREAS,** due to the complete devastation caused by Severe Tropical Storm Paeng, many people were left without access to basic supplies, including food, clean drinking water, and medical equipment. This necessitated urgent assistance and response efforts, including the procurement, transportation, and distribution of emergency relief commodities for the affected population.;

**WHEREAS,** Vice-President Sara Duterte-Carpio, through the Office of the Vice-President (OVP) as part of a disaster relief initiative to the communities affected by Severe Tropical Storm Paeng was able to provide assistance to 500 families in Datu Odin, Sinsuat, Maguindanao del Norte, as well as other parts of the Bangsamoro Region;

**WHEREAS,** to alleviate the suffering of the people of the Bangsamoro, the Vice-President expressed her solidarity with the calamity-stricken families and signified to supporting a recovery plan for victims of Severe Tropical Storm Paeng;

**WHEREAS,** Vice-President Sara Duterte-Carpio played a significant role in making sure that basic goods and relief supplies reached the people of the Bangsamoro region who were affected by the disaster; her proactive approach and compassion were instrumental in providing much-needed assistance to those in need;

**NOW THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED,** as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, the Bangsamoro extends its heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to Vice-President Sara Duterte-Carpio for her quick response and assistance in the disaster relief efforts.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER,** that a copy of this foregoing Resolution be furnished to the Office of Vice-President Sara Duterte-Carpio, for information.

**ADOPTED,** __________

(Sgd.)
**MP ENGR. AIDA M. SILONGAN**
Author

(Sgd.)
**MP ATTY. MARY ANN M. ARNADO**
Author

(Sgd.)
**MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**
Author

(Sgd.)
**MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL**
Author

(Sgd.)
**MP EDDIE M. ALIH**
Author
