Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**Second Parliament**
**First Regular Session**

**Proposed Resolution No. 144**

Authored by:

MP SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA, MP RAISSA H. JAJURIE, MP LAISA M. ALAMIA, MP MOSBER ALAUDDIN, MP EDDIE M. ALIH, MP BAINTAN AMPATUAN, MP SUSANA S. ANAYATIN, MP MARY ANN M. ARNADO, MP ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN, MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, MP MATARUL M. ESTINO, MP EDUARD U. GUERRA, MP ABDULLAH B. HASHIM, MP MOHAGHER M. IQBAL, MP FAISAL G. KARON, MP JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM, MP JOSE I. LORENA, MP ABDULRAOF A. MACACUA, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL, MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG, MP RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR, MP UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP RANDOLPH C. PARCASIO, MP RAMON A. PIANG SR., MP ROMEO K. SEMA, MP SAID M. SHEIK, MP AIDA M. SILONGAN, MP DR. KADIL M. SINOLINDING JR., MP ADZFAR H. USMAN, MP BASSIR D. UTTO, MP TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT, MP PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG, MP LANANG T. ALI, JR., MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN, MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG, MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI, MP OMAR YASSER C. SEMA, MP PAISALIN P. TAGO, MP NABIL A. TAN

**RESOLUTION AMENDING THE CALENDAR OF SESSION OF THE FIRST REGULAR SESSION OF THE SECOND PARLIAMENT**

WHEREAS, Section 4, Rule VI of the Parliamentary Rules, Procedures and Practices of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority – Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao states that:

> “**Section 4. Conduct of Sessions.** — Plenary sessions shall commence at one o’clock in the afternoon on Mondays through Thursdays of the third and fourth week of the month. xxx”

WHEREAS, on Safar 24, 1444/September 20, 2022, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, through Resolution No. 265, adopted a Calendar of Session to guide the Members of the Parliament in the performance of their legislative and constituency-serving functions;

WHEREAS, under Resolution 265, the session days of the third week of the month of March 2023 was not reflected in the adopted Calendar of Session;

WHEREAS, during its 4th Committee Meeting held on January 10, 2023, the Committee on Rules recognized the omission and thereafter approved the inclusion of the third week of the month of March 2023 in the Calendar of Session;

**NOW THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, as it is hereby resolved, to amend Resolution No. 265 to include the session days of the third week of March 2023 in the Calendar of Session, as follows:

1. Inaugural Session - September 15, 2022
2. Resumption of Session - September 20, 2022
3. Adjournment of Session - September 22, 2022
4. Resumption of Session - September 26, 2022
5. Adjournment of Session - September 29, 2022
6. Resumption of Session - October 17, 2022
7. Adjournment of Session - October 20, 2022
8. Resumption of Session - October 24, 2022
9. Adjournment of Session - October 27, 2022
10. Resumption of Session - November 14, 2022
11. Adjournment of Session - November 17, 2022
12. Resumption of Session - November 21, 2022
13. Adjournment of Session - November 24, 2022
14. Resumption of Session - December 12, 2022
15. Adjournment of Session - December 15, 2022
16. Resumption of Session - December 19, 2022
17. Adjournment of Session - December 22, 2022
18. Resumption of Session - January 16, 2023
19. Adjournment of Session - January 19, 2023
20. Resumption of Session - January 23, 2023
21. Adjournment of Session - January 26, 2023
22. Resumption of Session - February 13, 2023
23. Adjournment of Session - February 16, 2023
24. Resumption of Session - February 20, 2023
25. Adjournment of Session - February 23, 2023
**26. Resumption of Session - March 13, 2023**
**27. Adjournment of Session - March 16, 2023**
28. Resumption of Session - March 20, 2023
29. MANDATORY ADJOURNMENT - March 21, 2023.

ADOPTED, Jumada al-Thani ___ 1444, January __, 2023.

**MP SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA**

**MP RAISSA H. JAJURIE**

**MP LAISA M. ALAMIA**

**MP MOSBER ALAUDDIN**

**MP EDDIE M. ALIH**

**MP BAINTAN AMPATUAN**

**MP SUSANA S. ANAYATIN**

**MP MARY ANN M. ARNADO**

**MP ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN**

**MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL**

**MP MATARUL M. ESTINO**

**MP EDUARD U. GUERRA**

**MP ABDULLAH B. HASHIM**

**MP MOHAGHER M. IQBAL**

**MP FAISAL G. KARON**

**MP JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM**

**MP JOSE I. LORENA**

**MP ABDULRAOF A. MACACUA**

**MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG**

**MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG**

**MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**

**MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG**

**MP RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR**

**MP UBAIDA C. PACASEM**

**MP RANDOLPH C. PARCASIO**

**MP RAMON A. PIANG SR.**

**MP ROMEO K. SEMA**

**MP SAID M. SHEIK**

**MP AIDA M. SILONGAN**

**MP DR. KADIL M. SINOLINDING JR.**

**MP ADZFAR H. USMAN**

**MP BASSIR D. UTTO**

**MP TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT**

**MP LANANG T. ALI, JR.**

**MP PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**

**MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG**

**MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN**

**MP OMAR YASSER C. SEMA**

**MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI**

**MP PAISALIN P. TAGO**

**MP NABIL A. TAN**
