Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 167**

Introduced by
**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA and MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr.**

Co-Authored by
**MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, MPSA; MP Rasul E. Ismael; MP Khalid Ma-Amor Hadji Abdullah; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; MP Bassir D. Utto; MP Tawakal Midtimbang**

**RESOLUTION CALLING ON THE MINISTRY OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS AND DEVELOPMENT (MHSD) TO FORMULATE AND PRESCRIBE GUIDELINES ON THE REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESSES OF COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLANS (CLUPs) AND ZONING ORDINANCES (ZOs), AND PROVINCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND PHYSICAL FRAMEWORK PLANS (PDPFPs) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS (LGUs) IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM)ยน**

**WHEREAS,** Section 2, Article IV of Republic Act No. 11054, otherwise known as the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL), states that in the exercise of its right to self-governance, the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region is free to pursue its political, economic, social, and cultural development as provided for in this Organic Law;

**WHEREAS,** Section 106 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, provides that each Local Government Unit (LGU) shall have its comprehensive multi-sectoral development plan;

**WHEREAS,** the Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development (DHSUD) issued a Memorandum Circular No. 2021-005, Series of 2021, regarding the Revised Review and Approval Processes of Comprehensive Land Use Plans and Zoning Ordinances of highly urbanized cities (HUCs), independent component cities, (ICCs), component cities and municipalities (CCMs), and Metro Manila cities and municipalities (MMCMs);

**WHEREAS,** the DHSUD also issued a Memorandum Circular No. 2021-009, Series of 2022, regarding the review and approval process of Provincial Physical Framework Plans (PPFP) or the Provincial Development and Physical Framework Plans (PDPFPs) of the provinces;

**WHEREAS,** Section 2, Title VI of the Bangsamoro Administrative Code mandates the MHSD as the main planning and policy-making, regulatory, program coordination, and performance monitoring entity for all housing, human settlements, and urban development concerns in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

**WHEREAS,** it is necessary to impose preparation of plans as it defines the vision for the future, with long-range goals and objectives for all undertakings of the local government units;

**WHEREAS,** the MHSD, as the counterpart of DHSUD in the region, needs to formulate and prescribe similar guidelines, taking into consideration the context, historical background, and peculiarities of the region;

**WHEREAS,** the formulation and prescription of such guidelines will enlighten the LGUs on the review and approval processes of their mandated plans, thus helping expedite the approval process;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED,** by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, to call on the MHSD to formulate and prescribe guidelines on the review and approval processes of Comprehensive Land Use Plans and Zoning Ordinances, and Provincial Development and Physical Framework Plans of the LGUs in the BARMM.

**RESOLVED FINALLY,** to forward the foregoing resolution to the MHSD for information and appropriate action.

Resolution adopted and passed this _____ day of ______, 2023, Cotabato City Philippines.

Adopted,

**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
