Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA Parliament**

**BTA RESOLUTION No. 127**

**Introduced by:**

**MP DR. SUSANA SALVADOR – ANAYATIN**

**Co-Authors:** 
**MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong; MP Mohammad Kelie U. Antao; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto; MP Hatimil E. Hassan; MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang; MP Khalid M. Hadji Abdullah**

**A RESOLUTION URGING THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DAY TO CONSTITUTE AND OPERATIONALIZE THE COUNCIL OF LEADERS PURSUANT TO SECTION 9, ARTICLE VI OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11054 AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREOF.**

**WHEREAS,** the Council of Leaders is a focused group who fulfill a number of special functions which includes but not limited to promoting the right of the represented to participate in the crafting of policies that involve their interest and welfare, and serve as visible advocates by effectively articulating concerns and address issues of the community they are representing.

**WHEREAS,** their primary role is to provide guidance and assistance in identification of pertinent necessities for the development and growth, and possible solicitation of ideas to attain common goal while simultaneously enhancing the image and advancement of the community.

**WHEREAS,** Section 9, Article VI of Republic Act No. 11054 otherwise known as Bangsamoro Organic Law on Council of Leaders reads:

> There shall be a Council of Leaders that shall advise the Chief Minister on matters of governance in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall consist of the following members:
> 
> a) Chief Minister as head of the council;
> b) Members of the Congress of the Philippines from the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;
> c) Provincial governors, and mayors of chartered cities in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;
> d) Representatives of traditional leaders, non-Moro indigenous communities, women, settler communities, the Ulama, youth, and Bangsamoro communities outside of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region; and
> e) Representatives of other sectors.
> 
> The mechanism of representation and number of representatives in paragraphs (d) and (e) shall be determined by the Parliament. The representation of the non-Moro indigenous communities shall be pursuant to their customary laws and indigenous processes.

**WHEREAS,** consistent with the above cited provision, under Book II Intergovernmental Relations of Bangsamoro Autonomy Act No. 13, otherwise known as Bangsamoro Administrative Code eloquently detailed the important participation of Council of Leaders to coordinate and resolve issues on intergovernmental relations through regular consultation and continuing negotiation in a non-adversarial manner. ^1

**WHEREAS,** this Proposed Resolution aim to aid the BARMM Parliament in formulating policies relevant to the community represented by the Council of Leaders; coordinate, monitor, and evaluate the implementation of the policies, plans, and programs to ascertain the equality of opportunities accorded to them; and to ensure full participation of the minorities in the legislation as guaranteed by the statutory law provided in the Bangsamoro Organic Law.

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED,** as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Parliament of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao in **A RESOLUTION URGING THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DAY TO CONSTITUTE AND OPERATIONALIZE THE COUNCIL OF LEADERS PURSUANT TO SECTION 9, ARTICLE VI OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11054 AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREOF.**

Adopted, December \_\_\_, 2022.

Author:

(Sgd.)
**DR. SUSANA S. ANAYATIN**
Member – BTA Parliament

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**ATTY. ALI PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
