Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

**First Regular Session**
**Second Parliament**

**Proposed Resolution No. 104**

**Introduced by:**
BTA Member **ABDULLAH B. HASHIM**

**Co-Authors:**
Hon. Bai Maleiha B. Candao, Hon. Michael E. Midtimbang, Hon. Susana S. Anayatin, Hon. Don Mustapha A. Loong, Hon. Aida M. Silongan, Hon. Hatimil E. Hassan, Hon. Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Hon. Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Hon. Suharto S. Esmael, Hon. Marjanie S. Macasalong, Hon. Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Hon. Mosber E. Alauddin, Hon. Abdullah G. Macapaar, Hon. Bassir D. Utto, and Hon. Basit S. Abbas

**A RESOLUTION**

**URGING ALL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS WITHIN BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO TO EXEMPT PRACTICING MUSLIM STUDENTS FROM JOINING TASKS WITH PROHIBITED ACTS IN ISLAM IN THEIR PHYSICAL EDUCATION CLASSES AND ASSIGN DIFFERENT TASKS INSTEAD**

**WHEREAS,** the 1987 Philippine Constitution provides that, “No law shall be made respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the **free exercise** thereof. **The free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and worship, without discrimination or preference, shall forever be allowed.** No religious test shall be required for the exercise of civil or political rights.¹”;

**WHEREAS,** the Bangsamoro Organic Law dictates that, “The parliament shall adopt measures to ensure mutual respect and protection of the distinct beliefs, customs, and traditions of the Bangsamoro people and the other inhabitants in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.²”

**WHEREAS,** Muslim students of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao strive to attain proper education without compromising their religious beliefs;

**WHEREAS,** primary, secondary, and higher education curriculum covers physical education classes that includes tasks such as singing, dancing, and involving music;

**WHEREAS,** muslim students, especially women who are wearing face veil or *niqab*, experiences difficulty in complying with such tasks thus compromising their grades;

**WHEREAS,** Islam’s code of *haya* (modesty) extends to all of woman’s life including her attire, her hijab, her words, and her actions;

**WHEREAS,** it is stated in the qur’an that “Do not be soft in speech [to men].” (Q.S Al-Ahzab : 32) which connotes woman who soften her voice (singing) is forbidden in Islam because her voice is also her *awra*;

**WHEREAS,** the Holy Qur’an conveys the message, “And of mankind is he who purchases idle talks (i.e. music, singing, etc.) to mislead (men) from the Path of Allâh without knowledge, and takes it (the Path of Allâh, or the Verses of the Qur’an) by way of mockery. For such there will be a humiliating torment (in the Hell-fire).³;

**WHEREAS,** Ibn ‘Abbās said: “It refers to singing.” (Tafsir At-Tabari) while Hasan Al-Basrī: said: “The verse was revealed concerning flutes and singing.” (Tafsir Ibn Kathīr) Ibn Mas’ūd said: “By Allah besides whom there is none worthy of worship, it refers to singing.” And he repeated it three times. And the same was reported from Ibn ‘Umar;⁴

**WHEREAS,** the Holy Qur’an further conveys the message, “And tell the believing women to lower their gaze (from looking at forbidden things), and protect their private parts (from illegal sexual acts, etc.) and not to show off their adornment except only that which is apparent (like palms of hands or one eye or both eyes for necessity to see the way, or outer dress like veil, gloves, head-cover, apron, etc.), and to draw their veils all over Juyubihinna (i.e. their bodies, faces, necks and bosoms, etc.) and not to reveal their adornment except to their husbands, their fathers, their husband's fathers, their sons, their husband's sons, their brothers or their brother's sons, or their sister's sons, or their (Muslim) women (i.e. their sisters in Islam), or the (female) slaves whom their right hands possess, or old male servants who lack vigour, or small children who have no sense of the shame of sex. **And let them not stamp their feet so as to reveal what they hide of their adornment.** And all of you beg Allah to forgive you all, O believers, that you may be successful.⁵”;

**NOW THEREFORE, be it;**

**RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED,** by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to urge all educational institutions within Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to exempt our practicing Muslim students from joining any of the prohibited acts in Islam such as singing, dancing, exercises or activities in a particular subject Physical Education;

**RESOLVED, FURTHER** that a copy of this resolution be furnished to Ministry of Basic, Higher, and Technical Education, Schools Divisions, and all educational institutions within Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao;

**RESOLVED, FINALLY,** that a copy of this resolution shall be posted in a conspicuous area of every educational institution in Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao such as the bulletin board.

Adopted, __________.

(Sgd.)
**ABDULLAH B. HASHIM**
Member of the Parliament
