Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**First Regular Session**

**Proposed Resolution No. 130**

Authored by **DEPUTY FLOOR ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**

Co-Authored by **MPs DEPUTY SPEAKER ATTY. NABIL A. TAN, DEPUTY SPEAKER ATTY. OMAR YASSER C. SEMA, DEPUTY SPEAKER ATTY. PAISALIN P. TAGO, DEPUTY CHIEF MINISTER ALBAKIL D. JIKIRI, ATTY. RANDOLPH C. PARCASIO, ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN AND ADZFAR H. USMAN**

**A RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE SINCERE APPRECIATION AND GRATITUDE OF THE BANGSAMORO TO SENATORS IMEE ROMUALDEZ MARCOS AND ATTY. GILBERT TEODORO FOR PROVIDING DISASTER RELIEF AND ASSISTANCE TO THE PEOPLE OF THE BANGSAMORO WHO SUFFERED DAMAGE CAUSED BY SEVERE TROPICAL STORM PAENG.**

WHEREAS, on October 26, 2022, a tropical storm known as Paeng hit the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM), resulting in massive destruction, loss of life, and damage to agriculture and critical infrastructure due to flooding, and landslides;

WHEREAS, as per the Bangsamoro Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (BDRRMC), tropical storm Paeng affected approximately 570,285 individuals in the region, with 53 fatalities, 12 missing persons, and 38 injured persons;

WHEREAS, tropical storm Paeng damaged 371 houses and partially damaged 480 others in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM). The storm also caused damage to infrastructure and agriculture, with estimated losses of around PHP 585,602,426.33;

WHEREAS, on October 29, 2022, Bangsamoro Chief Minister Ahod Ebrahim declared a state of calamity in the Bangsamoro Region due to the heavy damage and destruction brought about by tropical storm Paeng;

WHEREAS, despite the efforts of different ministries and offices of the BARMM to address the difficulties of the people affected by tropical storm Paeng, the limitation of time and additional manpower requires intervention of national government offices and personalities;

WHEREAS, Senator Imee R. Marcos and Atty. Gilbert Teodoro visited the Bangsamoro Region and its adjacent provinces inclusive of the 65 barangays of North Cotabato, and delivered the much needed basic relief goods and services;

WHEREAS, to relieve the hardship of the Bangsamoro people, Senator Marcos and Atty. Teodoro expressed their support and solidarity with the affected families.

WHEREAS, Senator Marcos and Atty. Teodoro made sure that said basic relief goods and services are delivered to the Bangsamoro region who were affected by the disaster; their untiring support and commitment were essential in providing much-needed assistance to those in need;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, as representative of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) extends its heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to Senator Imee R. Marcos and Atty. Gilbert Teodoro for their immediate response and assistance.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, that copy of this foregoing Resolution be given to the Office of Senator Imee R. Marcos and Atty. Gilbert Teodoro, for information.

ADOPTED, __________.

(Sgd.)
**DEPUTY FLOOR LEADER MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**
Author

**DEPUTY SPEAKER ATTY. NABIL A. TAN**
Co-Author

**ADZFAR H. USMAN**
Co-Author

**DEPUTY SPEAKER ATTY. OMAR YASSER C. SEMA**
Co-Author

**ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG**
Co-Author

**DEPUTY SPEAKER ATTY. PAISALIN P. TAGO**
Co-Author

**ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN**
Co-Author

**ATTY. RANDOLPH C. PARCASIO**
Co-Author

(Sgd.)
**DEPUTY CHIEF MINISTER ALBAKIL D. JIKIRI**
Co-Author
