Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 195**

Introduced by:
**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA**
**& MP Atty. Rasol Mitmug, Jr., CESE**

Co-authors:
**MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, MPSA; MP Rasul E. Ismael; MP Khalid Ma-Amor Hadji Abdullah; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; MP Bassir D. Utto; and MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang**

**RESOLUTION**

**CALLING ON THE BANGSAMORO ECONOMIC AND DEVELOPMENT (BEDC) COUNCIL THROUGH ITS SPECIAL COMMITTEE, THE REGIONAL LAND USE COMMITTEE (RLUC), TO FORMULATE IMMEDIATELY A LONG-TERM PLAN FOR THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO¹**

**WHEREAS**, Section 3 of the Bangsamoro Autonomy Act No. 6, otherwise known as the Bangsamoro Socio-Economic Development Planning Act of 2019, states that the Bangsamoro Economic and Development Council shall serve as the socio-economic planning, monitoring, and coordinating agency for all development plans, programs, and projects of the Bangsamoro Government. It shall evaluate and recommend short-, medium-, and long-term comprehensive development plans, programs, and projects for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, for approval by the Parliament;

**WHEREAS**, Section 5, Rule VI of the BEDC Resolution No. 1, Series of 2020, Resolution Adopting the Internal Rules and Procedures of the Bangsamoro Economic and Development Council of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, provides that the Regional Land Use Committee is among the special committees created to assist the BEDC in special concerns;

**WHEREAS**, Section 6, Rule VI of the BEDC Resolution No. 1, Series of 2020, provides that among the functions of the RLUC is to formulate and periodically update the Regional Physical Framework Plan (RPFP) taking into consideration national, interregional, regional, and local plans and policies;

**WHEREAS**, the RPFP is the long-term plan of the region. It is considered as the “mother of all plans” as it provides the long-term direction of the region and accordingly serves as a guide in the formulation of the medium-term regional development plan. It provides broad and general policy guidelines on the utilization of the region’s natural resources. It intends to guide the local government units in giving details on how different land uses will be prescribed and regulated;

**WHEREAS**, the BARMM Provincial Governments are formulating and updating their Provincial Development and Physical Framework Plan (PDPFP); and the Regional Government is in the course of finalizing the second Bangsamoro Development Plan (BDP);

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Government shall ensure horizontal and vertical alignment of all plans and interlink all levels of physical and socio-economic plans both through bottom-up and top-down manners. The RPFP, being the mother of all plans, shall be on top of the regional hierarchy of plans;

**WHEREAS**, the RPFP shall have a clear encompassing long-term vision with inward and outward looking components of a desired state and goal, specifically direction and trajectory, after 30 years with corresponding development thrust, goals, and strategies that will be operationalized by high impact programs and projects;

**WHEREAS**, the RPFP shall embody sets of policies that will guide public and private investments in order to have an efficient settlement pattern for better access of basic services and economic opportunities, and a rational mix of land uses that will promote productivity and environmental integrity;

**WHEREAS**, the RPFP shall be able to show the desired direction and intensity of growth of the region as a whole, as well as of its sub-regional areas;

**WHEREAS**, Daniel Burnham, the legendary architect and urban planner, once said “Make no little plans. They have no magic to stir men’s blood and probably will not themselves be realized. Make big plans, aim high in hope and work, remembering that a noble, logical diagram once recorded will never die, but long after we are gone will be a living thing, asserting itself with ever growing insistency. Remember that our sons and grandsons are going to do things that would stagger us”; ²

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the BTA Parliament, to call on the Bangsamoro Economic and Development Council through its special committee, the Regional Land Use Committee, to formulate immediately the long-term plan of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, that copy of this Resolution be furnished to the Bangsamoro Economic and Development Council through its Secretariat, the Bangsamoro Planning and Development Authority (BPDA), for information and appropriate action.

Resolution passed this ________ day of ________ 2023, Cotabato City, Philippines.

Adopted,

**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
