Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

First Regular Session
Second Parliament

**Proposed Resolution No. 211**

Introduced by:

**EDDIE MAPAG ALIH, MOHAGHER M. IQBAL, AND PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**

Co-Authors:
_________________

**RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE DEEPEST GRATITUDE OF THE BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT TO HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT FERDINAND MARCOS, JR. FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF HON. ABDULRAOF A. MACACUA AS OFFICER-IN-CHARGE GOVERNOR OF MAGUINDANAO DEL NORTE**

**WHEREAS**, His Excellency President Ferdinand Marcos, Jr. has recently appointed Hon. Abdulraof A. Macacua as the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) Governor of Maguindanao del Norte on April 5, 2023;

**WHEREAS**, prior to his appointment, Hon. Abdulraof A. Macacua served as Member of the Parliament, Bangsamoro Transition Authority and Senior Minister of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) and was also the Chief of Staff of the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front;

**WHEREAS**, Hon. Abdulraof A. Macacua is a well-respected and accomplished leader who has served the Bangsamoro people with distinction for many years, and his appointment as OIC Governor of Maguindanao del Norte is a testament to his leadership, integrity, competence, dedication and commitment to public service;

**WHEREAS**, his appointment is also an affirmation of the commitment of the administration of President Marcos, Jr. to mainstream the peace process, as wellas the continued engagement of the Bangsamoro community to ensure the gainsof democracy, peace process, and development in the region;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, that the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament express its deepest gratitude to His Excellency President Ferdinand Marcos, Jr. for the appointment of Hon. Abdulraof A. Macacua as the Officer-in-Charge Governor of Maguindanao del Norte;

**BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED**, that a copy of this resolution be furnished to the Office of His Excellency President Ferdinand Marcos, Jr.

Adopted, ____________, 2023.

Author:

**EDDIE MAPAG ALIH**
Member of the Parliament

**MOHAGHER M. IQBAL**
Member of the Parliament

**PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Member of the Parliament
