Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

**Resolution No. 280**

Introduced by: **MP KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., MD, DPBO**

**RESOLUTION**
**STRONGLY URGING THE BANGSAMORO GOVERNMENT TO INSTITUTIONALIZE THE NUTRITIONAL GUIDELINES FOR MUSLIM FILIPINOS (NGMF) INCLUDING THE FIVE (5) TRANSLATED DIALECTS**

**WHEREAS**, the Nutritional Guidelines for Filipinos (NGF) is a set of dietary guidelines based on the eating pattern, lifestyle, and health status of Filipinos. NGF contains all the recommendations to promote good health and proper nutrition for all age groups;

**WHEREAS**, in 2012, the National Nutrition Council Governing Board approved and adopted the revised NGF as the official guidelines of the Philippines;

**WHEREAS**, thus in 2015, the National Nutrition Council BARMM (NNC-BARMM) together with Darul-Ifta and Bureau of Madaris launched the Nutritional Guidelines for Muslim Filipinos (NGMF) with transliteration of Islamic context;

**WHEREAS**, the NGMF is a simple statement in English and Tagalog, with an Islamic perspective with emphasis on Halal foods, taken from the holy Qu’ran and Hadith that gives advice on the consumption of foods and food components for which there are public health concerns;

**WHEREAS**, the main goal of the NGMF is for the improvement of the Bangsamoro nutritional status, individual productivity, and quality of life of the population, through the adoption of desirable dietary practices and healthy lifestyles;

**WHEREAS**, the ten (10) messages of the NGMF with transliteration are as follows:

1. Eat a variety of foods everyday to get the nutrients needed by the body.
   *Allah SWT said: “O Mankind, eat from whatever is on earth [that is] lawful and good…” (Surah Baqarah, verse 168)*

2. Breastfeed infants exclusively from birth up to 6 months then give appropriate complementary foods while continuing breastfeeding for 2 years and beyond for optimum growth and development.
   *Allah SWT said: “Mothers shall breastfeed their children in two complete years…” (Surah Baqarah, verse 233)*

3. Eat more vegetables and fruits everyday to get the essential vitamins, minerals, and fiber for regulation of body processes.
   *Allah SWT said: “And He it is who causes gardens to grow, [both] trellised and untrellised, and palm trees and crops of different [kinds of] food and olives and pomegranates, similar and dissimilar (in taste). Eat of their fruit when they ripen..” (Surah An’am, verse 141)*

4. Consume fish, lean meat, poultry, egg, dried beans, or nuts daily for growth and repair of body tissues.
   *Allah SWT said: “And it is He who subjected the sea for you to eat from its tender meat [fish]…” (Surah Nahl, verse 14)*

5. Consume milk, milk products, and other calcium-rich foods, such as small fish and shellfish, everyday for healthy bones and teeth.
   *Allah SWT said: “And indeed, for you in grazing livestock is a lesson. We give you drink from what is in their bellies-between excretion and blood-pure milk, palatable to drinkers…” (Surah Nahl, verse 66)*

6. Consume safe foods and water to prevent diarrhea and other food-and water-borne diseases.
   *According to Jabir ibn Abd Allah, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Cover the utensils used for eating and drinking, because there will be a night during the year which an epidemic will fall. Whenever such epidemic will pass by an uncovered eating or drinking utensils, it shall infect it…” (Sahih Muslim)*

7. Use iodized salt to prevent Iodine Deficiency Disorders.
   *A narration from Bazar: Prophet Muhammad (saw) said: “I advise you to be like salt in the food for the people, that food will never be delicious without salt…” (Al-Hadith)*

8. Limit intake of salty, fried, fatty, and sugar-rich foods to prevent cardiovascular diseases.
   *Allah SWT said: “And eat and drink but waste not by extravagance, certainly He [Allah] like not Al-Musrifin [those who waste by extravagance]...” (Surah A’raf, verse 31)*

9. Attain normal body weight through proper diet and moderate physical activity to maintain good health and help prevent obesity.
   *Narrated by Umar ibn Khattab: The Prophet (saw) said: “Teach your children swimming, archery and horse riding…” (Sahih Muslim)*

10. Be physically active, make healthy food choices, manage stress, avoid alcoholic beverages, and do not smoke to help prevent lifestyle-related non-communicable diseases.
    *Allah SWT said: “Intoxicants [All kinds of alcoholic drinks], and gambling, and Al-Ansab, and Al-Azlam [arrows for seeking luck or decision] are an abomination of Shaitan’s [Satan] handiwork. So avoid [strictly all] that [abomination]...” (Surah Ma’idah, verse 90);*

**WHEREAS**, the 10 Kumainments is a popular version of the revised Nutritional Guidelines for Filipinos (NGF) which are simple and easy-to-remember guidelines to promote healthy living among Bangsamoros and translated into five (5) Dialects of BARMM (Yakan, Sama, Tausog, Maranao, and Maguindanao); See attached Annexes

**WHEREAS**, this resolution seeks to institutionalize the NGMF and 10 Kumainments at all levels of the Local Government and concerned agencies to improve dietary practices and healthy lifestyles.

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED** to urge the Bangsamoro Government to institutionalize the Nutritional Guidelines for Muslim Filipinos (NGMF) including the Five (5) translated dialects.

**FURTHER RESOLVED**, the Office of the Chief Minister and its concerned agencies to support the implementation of the Resolution.

**ADOPTED.**

Author:

(Signed)
**KADIL M. SINOLINDING JR., MD, DPBO**
Member of Parliament