Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament**
Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

**Resolution No. 295**

Introduced by:

**MP. TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG, MP. MUDJIB C. ABU, MP. BASSIR D. UTTO, MP. SUWAIB L. ORANON, MP. MOHAMMAD KELLIE U. ANTAO**

Co-Authors:

**MP. DENMARTIN A. KAHALAN, MP. MOSBER E. ALLAUDDIN, MP. EDDIE M. ALIH, MP. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, MP. FROILYN T. MENDOZA, MP. RASUL E. ISMAEL MP. NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN**

**“RESOLUTION REQUESTING THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL SERVICES AND DEVELOPMENT (MSSD) TO FURNISH KEY MINISTRIES AN UPDATED DATABASE ON THE LIST OF ACCREDITED AND REGISTERED ORPHANAGE CENTERS IN BARMM AND TO SUBMIT COMPREHENSIVE REPORTS OF SERVICES AND ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO THEM FOR PURPOSES OF CONSOLIDATING, PLANNING AND ALIGNING OF PROGRAMS AND SERVICES”**

**WHEREAS**, Section 7, Article IV of R.A. No. 11054, otherwise known as "Organic Law for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao," states that:

“The Bangsamoro Government shall ensure every Filipino citizen its territorial jurisdiction the provision of the basic necessities and equal opportunities in life. Social Justice shall be promoted in all aspects of life and phases of development in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.” xxx

**WHEREAS**, it is provided under Section 14 of article IX of RA 11054 of the Bangsamoro Organic Law that:

“The Bangsamoro Government shall respect, protect and promote the rights of children, especially orphans of tender age. They shall be protected from exploitation, abuse or discrimination. Their education and development, both physical and mental shall be fully addressed.” xxx

**WHEREAS**, it is provided under Section 12, Chapter 4, that the MSSD is authorized to establish, operate, and maintain Orphanage institutions, among others;

**WHEREAS**, Enhancing programs for orphans to meet their specific needs based on their geographical location is indeed important. While the overall goal of supporting orphans remains the same, the specific challenges and circumstances they face can vary depending on their location, cultural context, and local resources.

**WHEREAS**, When possible, orphans are supported by the family network in the form of sadaqah (voluntary giving or charity) or zakat, especially during Ramadan season, when Muslims are obliged to offer donations. However, during the rest of the year, an orphanage receives support from extended family members on an irregular basis and often decreases over time. Further, donations offered during the aforementioned season are typically pre packed meals, grocery items and meager amount of money which albeit helpful, could have been much impactful and practical if tailored to the specific needs of the orphans.

**WHEREAS**, the furnished database shall be utilized to realize the following measures:

1. To extend reach and coverage to institutions existing in remote areas under the Bangsamoro jurisdiction;
2. To collaborate and synchronize customized practical support packages needed by the institutions and orphans;
3. To establish a convergence mechanism through appointment of focal person in respective agencies for seamless coordination and accountability purposes;
4. To complementarily align and strategically integrate initiatives to maximize impact of shared interest;
5. To consolidate documentation reports for easy reference, identification and enhancements of services;
6. To conduct regular consultations and monitoring among stakeholders this shall include all the levels of interventions.

**NOW THEREFOR**, be it

**RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, as it is hereby resolved, to request the MSSD to furnish concerned key ministries an updated database of the list of accredited and registered orphanage centers, and to submit comprehensive reports of services and assistance provided to them for consolidating, planning and aligning of programs and services’ purposes.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, that to guarantee a comprehensive support program which may include but not limited to basic needs, health, education, security, justice, socio economic, emotional and spiritual needs, the hereunder listed key agencies are enjoined to craft initiatives respective of their mandates:

1. Office of the Chief Minister
2. Bangsamoro Planning and Development Authority
3. Bangsamoro Youth Commission
4. Ministry of Health
5. Ministry of Education
6. Ministry of the Interior and Local Government
7. Bangsamoro Human Rights Commission

**RESOLVED, FURTHERMORE**, that copies of this resolution be furnished to the aforementioned key agencies and other stakeholders for their information and appropriate actions.

Adopted, __________

**PRINCIPAL AUTHORS:**

(Signed)
**TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG**
*Member of the Parliament*

(Signed)
**MOHAMMAD KELLIE U. ANTAO**
*Member of the Parliament*

(Signed)
**BASSIR D. UTTO**
*Member of the Parliament*

(Signed)
**SUWAIB L. ORANON**
*Member of the Parliament*

**MUDJIB C. ABU**
*Member of the Parliament*

**CO- AUTHORS**

**DENMARTIN A. KAHALAN**
*Member of the Parliament*

**FROILYN T. MENDOZA**
*Member of the Parliament*

**MOSBER E. ALLAUDDIN**
*Member of the Parliament*

**RASUL E. ISMAEL**
*Member of the Parliament*

**EDDIE M. ALIH**
*Member of the Parliament*

**NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN**
*Member of the Parliament*

**DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG**
*Member of the Parliament*
