Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
Cotabato City

**Second Parliament**

**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
**First Regular Session**

**PROPOSED RESOLUTION No. 205**

__________________________________________________________________

Introduced by:

**MP. ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO, MP ATTY. OMAR YASSER C. SEMA, MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALIL**

Co-authors:

**MP ATTY. LAISA M. ALAMIA, MNSA, MP ENGR. BAITAN A. AMPATUAN, MNSA, MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG JR., MP RASUL E. ISMAEL, MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA T. LOONG**

__________________________________________________________________

“**RESOLUTION REQUESTING THE OFFICE OF THE HONORABLE CHIEF MINISTER TO GRANT A ONE-MONTH PAY INFLATION RELIEF ASSISTANCE TO ALL OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENT OF WHATEVER STATUS INCLUDING PERSONS ENGAGED UNDER CONTRACTS OF SERVICE AND JOB ORDER, TO BE SOURCED FROM ANY AVAILABLE FUNDS OF THE SAID MINISTRIES, AGENCIES AND OFFICES.**”

**WHEREAS**, the inhabitants of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region has been plagued by sustained rise in prices since August last year where the inflation rate rose from 1.9% in January 2022 to 7.8% in January 2023, with 7.5% in February 2023 from 1.6% in February 2022;

**WHEREAS**, the Regional Statistical Office in the BARMM of the Philippine Statistical Authority reported the sustained surge in the rate of inflation in the Bangsamoro since April 2022 where the rate rose to 2.1% then 2.4% in May, 3.1% in June, 3.6% in July, 4.9% in August, then 6% in September, 6.5% in October, 6% in November and 6.3% in December before it jumped to 7.8% in January 2023;

**WHEREAS**, the trend in the rise in prices will be further aggravated by the usual surge in the cost of basic commodities during the month of Ramadhan, which in this year will commence no later than 24 March 2023;

**WHEREAS**, the surge in prices will not only affect the Muslims who will be fasting during the month of Ramadhan but all inhabitants of the autonomous region;

**WHEREAS**, inflation will not only be felt by government employees but also by private sector entrepreneurs who will suffer lower sales due to reduced buying capability of the public;

**WHEREAS**, the impact of the rise in the cost of commodities during Christmas season is minimized by the 14th Month pay to the government and private sector employees;

**WHEREAS**, there is a need for financial assistance to alleviate the burden of our regional government employees during this upward trend in regional inflation as well as the aggravating rise in prices during Ramadhan;

**WHEREAS**, the grant of financial assistance to the regional government employees will also redound to the benefit of entrepreneurs of basic commodities as it will contain the reduction in the purchasing capabilities of most of the consumers;

**NOW, THEREFORE, be it**
RESOLVED, as it is hereby resolved, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to request the Office of the Honorable Chief Minister to grant a one-month pay Inflation Relief Assistance to all officials and employees of the Bangsamoro autonomous government of whatever status including persons engaged under contracts of service and job order, to be sourced from any available funds of the said Ministries, Agencies and Offices.

Adopted, ____________, 2023.

Authors:

**MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO**
Member – BTA Parliament

**MP ATTY. OMAR YASSER C. SEMA**
Member – BTA Parliament

**MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALIL**
Member – BTA Parliament

Co-Authors:

**MP ATTY. LAISA M. ALAMIA, MNSA**
Member – BTA Parliament

**MP RASUL E. ISMAEL**
Member – BTA Parliament

**MP ENGR. BAITAN A. AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Member – BTA Parliament

**MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA T. LOONG**
Member – BTA Parliament

**MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG JR.**
Member – BTA Parliament
