Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

**Parliament Resolution No. 324**

Introduced by
**MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authored by
**MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Benjamin T. Loong, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Atty. John Anthony L. Lim, Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, Michael E. Midtimbang, Hatimil E. Hassan, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Albakil D. Jikiri, Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Mohammad Kelie U. Antao, and Nabila Margarita P. Pangandaman**

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**RESOLUTION**

**URGING THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE AND BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT (MFBM) TO PROMOTE AND ADOPT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES TO RECOGNIZE THE USE OF MULTI-YEAR BUDGETING AND PROJECT PROPOSALS**

**WHEREAS**, the validity of a fund in a particular fiscal year (FY) is governed by the strict provisions of budgeting laws, rules, and regulations such that after the end of the validity period, any unreleased appropriations lapse while undisbursed or unutilized funds revert to the Treasury;

**WHEREAS**, such circumstance promotes a “use-it-or-lose-it” mentality and works against a more orderly spending pattern, especially in major capital projects which require multiple years to complete;

**WHEREAS**, in other jurisdictions, local governments have gone beyond the State annual budget minimum requirement and opted to develop a longer-term operating horizon that helps them plan further out on their day-to-day services and also to provide justification for their revenue and expenditure predictions¹;

**WHEREAS**, multi-year budgeting allows approval of longer-term funding while a multi-year project (MYP) refers to a program or project which will take more than one year to complete and require multi-year appropriations² and can also refer to a large-scale, stand-alone project which will be constructed over separate calendar years and which cannot be separated into smaller, independently operational phases;

**WHEREAS**, examples of multi-year programs or projects supported by continuing appropriations are those from existing laws such as R.A. No. 8150, otherwise known as the Public Works Act of 1995, and R.A. No. 6657 and R.A. No. 8532, which set funds specifically for the Agrarian Reform Program (ARP);

**WHEREAS**, the Department of Budget and Management recognizes the so-called “continuing appropriations,” which refers to those appropriations which have been previously enacted and continue to remain valid as an appropriation authority for the expenditure of public funds and also to appropriations available to support obligations for a specified purpose or project, such as multi-year construction projects which require the incurrence of obligations even beyond the budget year;

**WHEREAS**, continuing appropriations are covered by special laws and appropriated as one lump sum which does not lapse until its purpose is fulfilled;

**WHEREAS**, a study conducted on various local governments applying multi-year budgeting yielded positive findings³:
1. Reduces political problems as the budget reaffirmation occurs annually, and the budget is less likely to be affected by political fray;
2. Reinforces commitment to long-term fiscal health by looking beyond a one-year time horizon in our ability to fund operating programs and capital improvements;
3. Providing residents with more certainty about the direction of local government services, finances, and tax levels;
4. Making more strategic use of the governing body’s time in reviewing budgets and the administration’s time in preparing them;
5. Focusing on continuous improvement and implementation and not just planning;
6. Retaining the benefits of an annual budget through quarterly reviews and “tweaking;”
7. Having the ability to incorporate operating costs linked to the capital improvement plan;
8. Instilling discipline to control spending plan changes;
9. Allowing elected officials to see how important programs get implemented over time when they are timed to the council/commission election cycle;
10. Promotes more orderly spending patterns; in other words, mitigates against the use-it-or-lose-it mentality; and
11. Planning long-term so that long-term goals can be achieved.

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) is in the process of building the foundations of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM);

**WHEREAS**, there is a need to adopt mechanisms that help the government keep an eye on the future and ensures that the activities being undertaken are sustainable, impactful, achievable, and time-bound;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Parliament, to URGE THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE AND BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT (MFBM) TO PROMOTE AND ADOPT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES TO RECOGNIZE THE USE OF MULTI-YEAR BUDGETING AND PROJECT PROPOSALS;

**RESOLVED, FINALLY**, that copies of this resolution be furnished to the Office of the Chief Minister (OCM) and the offices of all the Bangsamoro Ministers.

**ADOPTED**,

Author:
**HON. MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authors:
**HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA**
**HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG**
**HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN**
**HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG**
**HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
**HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO**
**HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL**
**HON. MP ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM**
**HON. MP JAAFAR APOLLO MIKHAIL L. MATALAM**
**HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN**
**HON. MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP ALBAKIL D. JIKIRI**
**HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN**
**HON. MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO**
**HON. MP NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN**

Certified Correct:
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
*Secretary General*

Attested:
**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
*Speaker*
