Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

**Parliament Resolution No. 328**

Introduced by
**MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authored by
**MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Benjamin T. Loong, Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Atty. Jose I. Lorena, Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Diamila D. Ramos, Adzfar H. Usman, Mohammad Kelie U. Antao, Eddie M. Alih, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Mudjib C. Abu, Suwaib L. Oranon, Bassir D. Utto, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, Michael E. Midtimbang, Basit S. Abbas, Muslimin A. Jakilan, and Dr. Susana S. Anayatin**

**RESOLUTION**

**CALLING ON THE MINISTRY OF BASIC, HIGHER, AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION (MBHTE) TO CONDUCT A COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10922, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL LITERACY ACT OF 2015” IN THE BANGSAMORO REGION**

**WHEREAS**, at the international level, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) recognizes financial literacy as an important life skill for individuals;

**WHEREAS**, at the national level, the Philippine government similarly recognizes the importance of financial literacy through the adoption of Republic Act No. 10922, also known as “The Economic and Financial Literacy Act,” which establishes the second week of November each year as “Economic and Financial Literacy Week” to raise awareness of the importance of financial literacy among the youth;

**WHEREAS**, the aforementioned law requires relevant government agencies, including local government units, to collaborate with each other and with the National Economic Development Agency as the lead agency to advocate and implement activities in celebration of this week;

**WHEREAS**, the said Act specifically encouraged the Department of Education *“to assess and revise the high school economics curriculum to make it more age-appropriate, and ensure that economic and financial education becomes an integral part of formal learning;”*

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Education Code of 2021 declares that it is the policy of the Bangsamoro government to pursue an integrated system of quality education that is relevant to the needs of the Bangsamoro people;

**WHEREAS**, the Institute Organization defines financial literacy for Economic Co-operation and Development International Network on Financial Education (OECD/INFE) as *“people’s understanding of financial concepts as well as their skills and ability to manage money and make informed financial decisions;”*

**WHEREAS**, it is universally recognized that financial literacy plays a significant role in reducing poverty and improving financial well-being. The low financial literacy rate in developing countries means cycles of poverty continue, often intergenerationally. However, improving financial literacy rates in developing countries through education can help create pathways out of poverty, improving the financial standing and economic stability of low-income individuals;”

**WHEREAS**, the poverty incidence in the Bangsamoro, which for now is at 39.4 percent, is still relatively higher compared to other regions in the country;

**WHEREAS**, there is a need for the Bangsamoro government to ensure the formulation and implementation of measures to ensure the financial literacy of its constituency as one of its efforts to address poverty in the region;

**NOW THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Parliament to **CALL ON THE MINISTRY OF BASIC, HIGHER, AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION (MBHTE) TO CONDUCT A COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10922, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL LITERACY ACT OF 2015” IN THE BANGSAMORO REGION.**

**ADOPTED**,

Author:

**HON. MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authors:

**HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA**
**HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN**
**HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG**
**HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
**HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO**
**HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL**
**HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG**
**HON. MP JAAFAR APOLLO MIKHAIL L. MATALAM**
**HON. MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI**
**HON. MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**
**HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN**
**HON. MP DIAMILA D. RAMOS**
**HON. MP ADZFAR H. USMAN**
**HON. MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO**
**HON. MP EDDIE M. ALIH**
**HON. MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP MUDJIB C. ABU**
**HON. MP SUWAIB L. ORANON**
**HON. MP BASSIR D. UTTO**
**HON. MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO**
**HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP BASIT S. ABBAS**
**HON. MP MUSLIMIN A. JAKILAN**
**HON. MP DR. SUSANA S. ANAYATIN**

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
*Secretary General*

Attested:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
*Speaker*
