Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**SECOND PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

Parliament Resolution No. **341**

Introduced by
MPs AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL, ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR.
Co-authored by
MPs ATTY. LAISA M. ALAMIA, ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN, ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO, ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, RASUL E. ISMAEL

**A RESOLUTION**

**COMMENDING THE APPOINTMENTS OF FORMER DEFENSE OFFICER-IN-CHARGE CARLITO GALVEZ, JR. AND FORMER OFFICER-IN-CHARGE ISIDRO PURISIMA TO KEY POSITIONS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ADVISER ON PEACE, RECONCILIATION, AND UNITY (OPAPRU)**

**WHEREAS**, on June 26, 2023, Malacañang reported the appointment of former Defense Officer-In-Charge Carlito Galvez, Jr. as the new Chief of the Office of the Presidential Adviser on Peace, Reconciliation, and Unity (OPAPRU), as well as the appointment of former Peace Officer-In-Charge Isidro Purisima as the agency’s new senior undersecretary;

**WHEREAS**, the members of the Bangsamoro Parliament extend warm congratulations and appreciation to former Defense Officer-In-Charge Carlito Galvez, Jr. and former Peace Officer-In-Charge Isidro Purisima for their recent appointments to crucial positions within the OPAPRU;

**WHEREAS**, recognizing their significant contributions to the Bangsamoro peace process and their dedicated service to the nation, the Bangsamoro Parliament expresses its utmost admiration and support for their continuing endeavors;

**WHEREAS**, former Defense OIC Galvez, Jr. has exemplified outstanding leadership and commitment throughout his tenure, most notably his leadership in the campaign for the plebiscite and eventual ratification of the Bangsamoro Organic Law;

**WHEREAS**, former Peace OIC Purisima has demonstrated exceptional expertise and a deep understanding of conflict transformation and peace sustainability, as exemplified by his notable contributions as Presidential Assistant for Local Conflict Transformation and Peace Sustainability, as well as his prior role as Deputy Presidential Adviser for Operations in the now-defunct Office of the Presidential Adviser on Peace Process;

**WHEREAS**, the recent appointments of Galvez, Jr., and Purisima reflect the trust and confidence placed upon them to advance the Bangsamoro peace process and serve as a testament to their exceptional qualifications, dedication, and unwavering commitment to fostering lasting peace, reconciliation, and unity in the Bangsamoro region;

**WHEREAS**, their invaluable contributions have paved the way for meaningful dialogue, collaboration, and sustainable peace-building initiatives among the various stakeholders in the region, that have promoted an atmosphere of trust and understanding;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Government expresses its unwavering support and utmost confidence in their appointments, and hopes this will pave the way for significant progress, development, and tangible results in achieving lasting peace, reconciliation, and unity in the Bangsamoro region;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to commend the recent appointments of former Defense Officer-In-Charge Carlito Galvez, Jr. and former Officer-In-Charge Isidro Purisima to key positions in the Office of the Presidential Adviser on Peace, Reconciliation, and Unity (OPAPRU).

Adopted,

AUTHORS:

(Signed)
**AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**

**ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR.**

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker