Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT**
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Regular Session

**PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 386**

Introduced By: **MP Suharto S. Esmael, MSc**

Co-Authors: **MP Atty. Mary Ann M. Arnado, MP Amroussi A. Macatanong, MP Ramon A. Piang Sr., MP Atty. Sha Elijah B. Dumama-Alba, MP Marjanie S. Macasalong, MP Estino M. Matarol, MP Susana S. Anayatin, MP Atty. Anna Tarhata S. Basman**

**A RESOLUTION REQUESTING THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH (MOH) TO DIRECT ALL HOSPITALS IN THE BANGSAMORO REGION TO LIFT THE MANDATORY COVID-19 SWAB TEST REQUIREMENT FOR HOSPITAL ADMISSIONS IN RESPONSE TO THE DECLARATION OF PRESIDENT FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR. LIFTING THE STATE OF PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES**

**WHEREAS**, Section 15, Article II of the 1987 Philippine Constitution, provides that, it is the State’s Policy to protect and promote the right to health of the people;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao is committed to providing accessible and quality healthcare services to all its constituents;

**WHEREAS**, Proclamation No. 22, DECLARING A STATE OF PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES, which shall remain in force and effect until lifted or withdrawn by the President was signed by President Rodrigo R. Duterte on the 8th of March 2020;

**WHEREAS**, the mandatory swab test requirement for hospital admission was initially implemented as a precautionary measure to control the spread of COVID-19 in healthcare facilities;

**WHEREAS**, on the 21st of July 2023, President Ferdinand R. Marcos Jr. signed Proclamation No. 297, LIFTING OF THE STATE OF PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES DUE TO COVID-19, signifying a decline in COVID-19 cases and the containment of the pandemic in the country;

**WHEREAS**, Proclamation No 297, provides that, all prior Orders, Memoranda, and issuances that are effective during the State of Public Emergency shall be deemed withdrawn, revoked or cancelled and shall no longer be in effect,

**WHEREAS**, the mandatory swab test requirement before admission in all hospitals within the Bangsamoro Region has presented significant challenges and barriers for patients seeking immediate medical attention;

**WHEREAS**, with the improvement in the COVID-19 situation in the region, the continuance of mandatory swab testing for hospital admission may cause unnecessary burden on patients and health facilities;

**WHEREAS**, various studies and reports have indicated that swab test results may not always be readily available and the delay can negatively impact critical medical decisions and treatment plans;

**WHEREAS**, the removal of the mandatory swab test requirement for hospital admission would promote ease of access to healthcare services and help patients receive prompt medical attention without undue delays;

**RESOLVED AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, requesting Ministry of Health (MOH) to direct all hospitals in Bangsamoro Region to lift the mandatory covid-19 swab test for all hospital admissions in response to the declaration of President Ferdinand R. Marcos, Jr. lifting the state of public health emergency throughout the Philippines.

**RESOLVED FURTHER**, that the Bangsamoro Government, through the Ministry of Health (MOH) and relevant hospital authorities shall be observed the following in the implementation of this resolution:

1. Hospitals in the Bangsamoro Region shall be guided by clinical evaluation and symptoms assessment in determining the admission of patients. The mandatory swab test will no longer be a requirement for hospital admission.

2. While the COVID health emergency is declared over, health facilities and personnel should continue to remain vigilant in monitoring and reporting any resurgence of COVID-19 cases to the MOH.

3. Healthcare facilities should continue to implement strict infection control protocols, including the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) and proper disinfection practices, to prevent the spread of infectious diseases.

4. The MOH shall conduct an information campaign to inform the public about the removal of the mandatory swab test for hospital admission and educate them about other health protocols still in place.

5. In the event of any sudden surge in COVID-19 cases or new health emergencies, the Bangsamoro Government reserves the right to reintroduce the mandatory swab test requirement as needed.

6. That despite the lowered alert levels, we shall be implementing an updated guideline on hospital admissions. The new directive shall ensure, all hospital institutions in the region, as a safe place for all. That the hospital remains committed to maintaining its disinfection and sanitation protocols, most especially its outpatient and inpatient facilities.

**RESOLVED FINALLY**, that this resolution shall be communicated to all relevant healthcare facilities, local government units, and the general public.

Adopted

(Sgd.)
**MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, MSc**
