Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 343**

Introduced by
MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA

Co-Authored by
MP Atty. Rasol Mitmug, Jr. MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, MPSA; MP Rasul E. Ismael; MP Khalid Ma-Amor Hadji Abdullah; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; MP Bassir D. Utto; MP Tawakal Midtimbang

**RESOLUTION**

**EXPRESSING DEEPEST CONDOLENCES AND SYMPATHIES TO THE BEREAVED FAMILY OF THE GRAND MUFTI OF THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM) SHEIKH ABUHURAIRA A. UDASAN AND EXTENDING PROFOUND APPRECIATION AND GRATITUDE FOR HIS CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE BANGSAMORO CAUSE AND TO THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION**

**WHEREAS**, Sheikh Abuhuraira A. Udasan, the Grand Mufti of the BARMM and the Executive Director of the Bangsamoro Darul Ifta, passed away on July 3, 2023;

**WHEREAS**, Sheikh Udasan was born on March 03, 1942 in Sultan Kudarat, Maguindanao. He was the son of Udasan Gutem Montok and Sa’Diah Sambelen Abdulrahman¹;

**WHEREAS**, in 1954, he enrolled at the Cotabato Provincial High School. Subsequently, he then flew to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to take up the Bachelor’s Degree of Da’wah And Islamic Usuloddin (Shariah) at the Islamic University Madina, where he finished his degree in the year of 1971²;

**WHEREAS**, Sheikh Udasan was appointed by Chief Minister Ahod Balawag Ebrahim as the Executive Director of the Bangsamoro Darul Ifta, thus assuming the grand mufti role³;

**WHEREAS**, the primary role of the Darul Ifta is the promulgation and issuance of a “fatwa” or legal opinion pertaining to the whole breath of Islamic jurisprudence⁴;

**WHEREAS**, the leadership of Sheikh Udasan as the Executive Director of Bangsamoro Darul Ifta played an important role in implementing the Islamic concepts on conflict resolution, and other matters of social welfare in the Bangsamoro region that helped attain a community that is peaceful and harmoniously co-exists with other religions;

**WHEREAS**, Sheikh Udasan dedicated his lifetime serving the Muslim ummah, for the sake of Allah;

**WHEREAS**, Sheikh Udasan will be best remembered for his work as a religious leader, peacebuilder, and for his great contributions to the Bangsamoro cause, people, and to the BARMM;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority offers its deepest sympathies to the bereaved family, relatives, and friends of Sheikh Abuhuraira A. Udasan. The BTA Parliament joins the Bangsamoro people in mourning the loss of one of our greatest revolutionaries and religious leaders of the Bangsamoro. May Allah (Subhanahu Wa Ta’ala) accept all his good deeds and grant him the highest place in Jannatul Firdaus. Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajion.

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, by the BTA Parliament to pass and approve this Resolution expressing deepest condolences and sympathies to the bereaved family of the Grand Mufti of the BARMM Sheikh Abuhuraira A. Udasan and extending profound appreciation and gratitude for his contributions to the Bangsamoro cause and to the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

**RESOLVED FURTHER**, that a copy of this Resolution be furnished to the bereaved family of BARMM Grand Mufti Sheikh Abuhuraira A. Udasan.

Adopted,

(Signed)
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Author
