Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

_________ Regular Session

**Proposed Resolution No. 384**

Introduced by:

**MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG**

Co-authors:

**MP RANDOLPH C. PARCASIO, MP SAID M. SHIEK, MP ABDULAZIS M. AMENODEN, MP DENMARTIN A. KAHALAN, MP ALI MONTAHA D. BABAO, MP ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, MP BASIT S. ABBAS, MP SUSANA S. ANAYATIN, MP MARY ANN M. ARNADO, MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG, MP ALI O. SALIK, MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN, MP ALBAKIL D. JIKIRI, MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO, MP NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN, MP HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN, and MP RASUL E. ISMAEL**

**A RESOLUTION**

**CONGRATULATING MOHAMAD NUR CASIB, A NATIVE OF LANAO DEL SUR FOR WINNING BRONZE MEDAL IN THE INTERNATIONAL CHEMISTRY OLYMPIAD HELD AT ZURICH, SWITZERLAND, THEREBY GIVING PRIDE AND HONOR TO THE BANGSAMORO PEOPLE**

**WHEREAS**, the International Chemistry Olympiad (IChO) is an annual competition for the world's most talented chemistry students at the secondary school level;

**WHEREAS**, nations around the world send a team of four students who are tested on their chemistry knowledge and skills in a five-hour laboratory practical exam and a five-hour written theoretical examination that are held on separate days with the practical examination usually being before the theoretical examination;

**WHEREAS**, the 55th International Chemistry Olympiad was held last July 16 to 25, 2023 in Zurich, Switzerland with one-hundred seven (107) participants from eighty-eight (88) countries, one of which is Philippines;

**WHEREAS**, Mohamad Nur Casib is a son of Dr. Norodin Casib and Dr. Sittie Nor Casib, both are natives of Marawi City and were also victims of Marawi Seige;

**WHEREAS**, being a Bangsamoro, Mohamad Nur Casib has been bringing honor and pride to the entire Bangsamoro Region by winning in competitions both international and national such as but not limited to International Mathematics and Science Olympiad for Primary School Students in Zhejiang, China and Metrobank-DepEd Math Challenge in Philippines;

**WHEREAS**, the exemplary achievement of Mr. Casib is a source of inspiration for the young professionals and aspirants in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and the entire nation which merits this Parliament’s recognition and commendation;

**WHEREAS**, it is without doubt that Mr. Casib is an honor and pride to this Region. His perseverance, dedication and courage were evident in attaining his achievements. It will forever serve as an inspiration not only to the people of Lanao del Sur but to the millions of Bangsamoro people across different countries of the world;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Parliament, to **CONGRATULATE MOHAMAD NUR CASIB FOR WINNING BRONZE MEDAL IN THE INTERNATIONAL CHEMISTRY OLYMPIAD**;

**BE IT RESOLVED, FURTHER**, that a copy of this resolution be furnished to **MR. MUHAMAD NUR CASIB**.

**ADOPTED**, ______________.

Author:

(Sgd.)
**MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG**
Member of Parliament

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker
