Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 425**

Introduced by
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**

Co-Authored by:
MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., MP Rasul E. Ismael, MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang, MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, MP Michael E. Midtimbang, MP Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod, MP Khalid Ma-Ampor Hadji Abdullah and MP Bassir. D. Utto

**RESOLUTION**

**URGING THE MINISTRIES, AGENCIES, AND OFFICES OF THE BANGSAMORO GOVERNMENT TO GRADUALLY SHIFT TO THE SELF-SUSTAINING PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS FROM DOLE OUT INTERVENTIONS**

**WHEREAS**, Section 7, Article IV of Republic Act No. 11054 or the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL) states that the Bangsamoro Government shall ensure every Filipino citizen in its territorial jurisdiction the provision of the basic necessities and equal opportunities in life. Social justice shall be promoted in all aspects of life and phases of development in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

**WHEREAS**, Section 3, Article V of the BOL provides that the Bangsamoro Government shall exercise the power expressly granted, those necessarily implied therefrom, as well as powers necessary, appropriate, or incidental for its efficient and effective governance and those which are essential to the promotion of general welfare. Within its territorial jurisdiction, the Bangsamoro Government shall ensure and support, among other things, the preservation and enrichment of culture, promote health and safety, enhance the right of the people to a balanced ecology, encourage and support the development of appropriate and self-reliant scientific and technological capabilities, improve public morals, enhance economic prosperity and social justice, promote full employment among its residents, maintain peace and order, and preserve the comfort and convenience of its inhabitants;

**WHEREAS**, Section 8, Article IX of the BOL states that the Bangsamoro Government shall provide, maintain, and ensure the delivery of basic and responsive health programs, quality education, appropriate services, livelihood opportunities, affordable and progressive housing projects, power and electricity, and water inhabitants of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

**WHEREAS**, Section 2, Article XIII of the BOL states that the Bangsamoro Government shall promote effective use of economic resources and endeavor to attain economic development that facilitates growth and full employment, human development and social justice;

**WHEREAS**, included in the 12-point priority agenda of BARMM is to set up and implement programs and projects that will respond to the pressing social and economic challenges in the Bangsamoro such as poverty, education, health, access to clean water and electricity, job opportunity, agricultural productivity, and access to capital market¹;

**WHEREAS**, based on the 2021 Family Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES), the BARMM recorded poverty incidence among families at 29.0 percent which translates to 0.23 million poor among BARMM families; 37.4 percent of people in BARMM were poor in 2021 which translates to 1.71 million considered poor families or below the poverty threshold. Basilan province recorded 53.5; Lanao del Sur at 10.9 percent; Maguindanao at 38.0 percent; Sulu at 62.5 percent; Tawi-Tawi recorded 36.5 percent while Cotabato City recorded 39.7 percent;

**WHEREAS**, these facts show that poverty is still very rampant in the Bangsamoro Region. It is imperative for the Bangsamoro Government to strategize and establish self-sustaining programs in helping improve the lives of the Bangsamoro people instead of dole out interventions;

**WHEREAS**, Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, or known as the 4Ps, is a human development measure of the national government that provides conditional cash grants to the poorest of the poor, to improve the health, nutrition, and the education of children aged 0-18. The lead government agency that implements the program is the Department of Social, Welfare, and Development (DSWD)²;

**WHEREAS**, the program has both a positive and negative impact to the society. The main disadvantage of the program is that it made the beneficiaries very much dependent on the grants;

**WHEREAS**, a dole out intervention develops a long-term mentality of dependence that misleads the poor into thinking that the improvement of their status is through government assistance, and that their welfare does not rely on their own efforts;

**WHEREAS**, based on performance audit report on 4Ps posted on the COA website on October 4, 2022, the Commission said the government’s antipoverty program received a total of P780.71 billion in funding between 2008 and 2021. It noted that there is a total of 4.2 million active 4Ps beneficiaries who have been on the program for 7 to 13 years. But 90 percent (90%) of them, or a total of 3,820,012 households, are still below the poverty threshold³; and

**WHEREAS**, a number of projects being implemented by the ministries, offices, and agencies under the General Appropriations Act of the Bangsamoro (GAAB) are considered dole-out;

**WHEREAS**, dole-out projects include cash and food assistance, consumable items, and other one-time interventions, except during disasters;

**WHEREAS**, it is significantly better and more beneficial to implement programs and projects that are designed to help those in need to generate a self-sustaining income that can allow them to break the poverty cycle and help provide for their families independently. In addition, these programs and projects can set the mentality of being less reliant on external funding such as financial grants from the government;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Parliament, to pass and approve this Resolution urging the ministries, agencies and offices to shift to the self-sustaining programs and projects from dole-out interventions.

Resolution passed this ____ day of ________ 2023, Cotabato City Philippines.

Adopted,

(Sgd.)
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Author

¹ https://mfbm.bangsamoro.gov.ph/mfbm-content/uploads/2021/04/BPDA-Salient-Points-of-the-1st-Bangsamoro-Development-Plan-BDP-2020-2022.pdf
² https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/programs/conditional-cash-transfer
³ https://www.pids.gov.ph/details/news/in-the-news/90-of-4ps-families-still-poor-says-coa-report
