Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 427**

Introduced by
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**

Co-Authored by:
MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., MP Rasul E. Ismael, MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang, MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, MP Michael E. Midtimbang, MP Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod, MP Khalid Ma-Ampor Hadji Abdullah and MP Bassir. D. Utto

**RESOLUTION**

**URGING THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE, BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT (MFBM) TO SUBMIT TO THE BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT THE BANGSAMORO EXPENDITURE PROGRAM (BEP) BY AUGUST OF EACH YEAR TO HAVE AMPLE TIME FOR REVIEW AND DELIBERATION**

**WHEREAS**, Section 1, Article XII of Republic Act No. 11054, or the Bangsamoro Organic Law, states that the Bangsamoro Government shall enjoy fiscal autonomy with the end in view of attaining economic self-sufficiency and genuine development.

**WHEREAS**, the aforementioned section also extends that the Bangsamoro Government shall prepare its budget and allocate funds in accordance with an annual appropriations law passed by the Parliament;

**WHEREAS**, the Ministry of Finance, and Budget and Management is primarily mandated to evolve sound, efficient and responsive fiscal management and utilization of resources. It shall be responsible for the formulation, institutionalization and administration of fiscal policies in coordination with other concerned ministries, agencies and instrumentalities of the Bangsamoro Government;

**WHEREAS**, the budget calendar of the executive starts in January and is submitted to the Parliament in September of each year;

**WHEREAS**, the 2023 Bangsamoro Expenditure Program was last filed on September 26, 2022, undertook its first reading on September 28, 2022, its second reading on September 29, 2022, and was approved on third and final reading on December 20, 2022;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Expenditure Programs of 2022¹ and 2023² were both approved by the Bangsamoro Parliament in December of their respective years;

**WHEREAS**, as of 28 September 2023, the Bangsamoro Expenditure Program for 2024 budget is not yet calendared in the order of business of the Bangsamoro Parliament;

**WHEREAS**, a lengthy process of crafting the BEP at the executive level affects the process in the Bangsamoro Parliament;

**WHEREAS**, there is a need to further expedite the process at the executive level;

**WHEREAS**, the submission of the BEP by August of each year provides the Bangsamoro Parliament an ample time and opportunity to review, deliberate and approve the BEP;

**WHEREAS**, early submission of the BEP manifests the efficiency of the Bangsamoro Government’s processes;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Parliament, to pass and approve this Resolution urging the Ministry of Finance, Budget and Management to submit to the Bangsamoro Parliament by August of each year to have ample time for review and deliberation.

Adopted,

(Sgd.)
**ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Author

¹ Fernandez, E. (2021). BARMM parliament OKs P79.8-B budget for 2022. Retrieved from https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1164045
² https://www.sunstar.com.ph/article/1949331/zamboanga/local-news/barmm-approves-p853-billion-2023-budget
