Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Cotabato City
**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session
Proposed Resolution No. **467**

Principal Author:
**MP DIAMILA DISIMBAN-RAMOS**

Co-Authors:
**MP DENMARTIN KAHALAN, MP TARHATA MAGLANGIT, MP RAMON PIANG, SR., MP ABDULLAH GAYAK, and MP ABDULAZIZ AMENODEN**

**RESOLUTION**
**CONGRATULATING AND COMMENDING THE BANGSAMORO ATHLETES IN THE 1ST KYOKUSHINRYU WORLD TOURNAMENT, MR. ABDULQUDDOS MOHAMAD FOR WINNING THE CHAMPIONSHIP IN THE 55-KG CATEGORY AND MR. AHMADINNIE YUSOP U. TALAPAS FOR SECURING 2ND PLACE IN THE 65-KG CATEGORY, FOR BRINGING PRIDE AND HONOR TO THE BANGSAMORO PEOPLE**

**WHEREAS**, the 1987 Philippine Constitution provides that the State shall promote physical education and encourage sports programs, league competitions, and amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to foster self-discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry;

**WHEREAS**, Section 13, Article IX of Republic Act No. 11054 or the Bangsamoro Organic Law provides that the Bangsamoro Government shall promote, among others, the mental and physical fitness of the youth through sports;

**WHEREAS**, pursuant to this mandate, the Bangsamoro Government is committed to promoting sports, by encouraging and supporting programs, leagues, competitions, indigenous games, martial arts, and amateur sports;

**WHEREAS**, the 1st KyokushinRyu World Tournament was hosted by the International Karate Alliance, Kyokushinryu and Kyokushin Karate-do Philippines which was held in Caloocan Sports Complex, Bagumbong, Caloocan City from November 11-12, 2023;

**WHEREAS**, the International Karate Alliance KyokushinRyu Karate was founded by Mr. Kancho Peter Chong. It emphasizes rigorous training, intense competitions, and moral principles like discipline, humility, and determination. The organization provides guidance and opportunities for members to enhance their KyokushinRyu skills and participate in international karate events;

**WHEREAS**, the International Karate Alliance, KyokushinRyu Philippines, also known as Kyokushin Karate-do Philippines, is acknowledged as one of the country's strongest karate organizations. Its success can be attributed to its well-organized training program, effective management, and extensive membership. As a non-profit organization, it aims to introduce the discipline of Kyokushin Karate to Filipino youth, with the goal of fostering a stronger society through martial arts;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro people made history for bagging awards after Mr. Abdulquddos D. Mohamad won the Championship in the 55-KG category and Mr. Ahmadinnie Yusop U. Talapas secured the 2nd Place in the 65-KG category of the 1st KyokushinRyu World Tournament;

**WHEREAS**, Mr. Abdulquddos D. Mohamad is a Bangsamoro athlete of Iranun descent, hails from both the Municipality of Sultan Mastura and the City of Cotabato in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM), and is the proud son of Mr. Daud M. Talapas and Mrs. Audilene U. Talapas;

**WHEREAS**, Mr. Ahmadinnie Yusop U. Talapas is a Bangsamoro athlete of Maguindanaon descent, hails from the City of Cotabato, Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM), and is the proud son of Mr. Abdulgani Salam Mohamad and Mrs. Salima Dimenda Mohamad;

**WHEREAS**, Mr. Abdulquddos D. Mohamad and Mr. Ahmadinnie Yusop U. Talapas’ exceptional demonstration of hard work, unwavering dedication, and relentless determination have served as a source of inspiration not only to the budding youth athletes hailing from Bangsamoro but also to many other aspiring athletes throughout the Philippines and their outstanding performances on the global stage have showcased the Bangsamoro spirit of competitiveness and excellence;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority expresses deep appreciation and immense pride in recognizing Mr. Abdulquddos D. Mohamad and Mr. Ahmadinnie Yusop U. Talapas for their remarkable achievements, extending full recognition and highest commendation for the distinction they have brought to the Bangsamoro people;

**NOW THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED, as it is hereby resolved** by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority to congratulate and commend the Bangsamoro athletes in the 1st KyokushinRyu World Tournament, Mr. Abdulquddos D. Mohamad for winning the Championship in the 55-KG category and Mr. Ahmadinnie Yusop U. Talapas for securing 2nd Place in the 65-KG category, for bringing pride and honor to the Bangsamoro people.

**RESOLVED FURTHER, to present a copy** of this resolution to Mr. Abdulquddos D. Mohamad and Mr. Ahmadinnie Yusop U. Talapas as a token of our recognition and appreciation of their exemplary achievements, and for their information and its necessary effects.

Author:
(Signed)
**DIAMILA DISIMBAN-RAMOS**
Member of the BTA Parliament

Co-authors:

**DENMARTIN KAHALAN**
Member of the BTA Parliament

**TARHATA MAGLANGIT**
Member of the BTA Parliament

**RAMON PIANG, SR.**
Member of the BTA Parliament

**ABDULLAH GAYAK**
Member of the BTA Parliament

**ABDULAZIZ AMENODEN**
Member of the BTA Parliament
