Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

Third Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 543**

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Introduced by:**
MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA and MP Atty. Omar Yasser C. Sema, MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, CESE; MP. Rasu E. Ismael, EMDRCM, MP Atty. Rasol Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; MP Michael E. Midtimbang; MP Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod; MP Khalid Ma-Ampor Hadji Abdullah; MP Bassir. D. Utto; and MP Ali B. Sangki

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**RESOLUTION**
**PROVIDING SPECIFIC TIME FOR MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT DURING PLENARY SESSION TO GIVE RECOGNITION, COMMENDATION, AND EXTEND CONDOLENCES, IF ANY, THEREBY AMENDING RULE NO. VIII OF APPROVED RESOLUTION NO. 268, OR RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR RULES, PROCEDURES AND PRACTICES OF THE BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY (BTA) PARLIAMENT**

**WHEREAS,** Section 3, Article V of Republic Act No. 11054, or the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL), provides that the Bangsamoro Government shall exercise the power expressly granted, those necessarily implied therefrom, as well as powers necessary, appropriate, or incidental for its efficient and effective governance and those which are essential to the promotion of general welfare. Within its territorial jurisdiction, the Bangsamoro Government shall ensure and support, among other things, the preservation and enrichment of culture, promote health and safety, enhance the right of the people to a balanced ecology, encourage and support the development of appropriate and self-reliant scientific and technological capabilities, improve public morals, enhance economic prosperity and social justice, promote full employment among its residents, maintain peace and order, and preserve the comfort and convenience of its inhabitants;

**WHEREAS,** Section 2, Article VII of the BOL states that the powers of government shall be vested in the Parliament which shall exercise those powers and functions expressly granted to it in this Organic Law, and those necessary for, or incidental to the proper governance and development of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall set policies, legislate on matters within its authority, and elect a Chief Minister who shall exercise executive authority on its behalf;

**WHEREAS,** Section 25, Article VII of the BOL provides that the Parliament shall adopt its own rules for the conduct of its business;

**WHEREAS,** Section 2, Article XVI of the BOL states that the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) is the interim government in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region during the transition period;

**WHEREAS,** Section 3, Article XVI of the BOL states:

> **Section 3. Powers and Authorities.** Legislative and executive powers in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region during transition shall be vested in the Bangsamoro Transition Authority. During the transition period, executive authority shall be exercised by the interim Chief Minister who shall be appointed by the President as such, while legislative authority shall be exercised by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority.
> 
> All powers and functions of the Bangsamoro Government as provided in this Organic Law is vested in the Bangsamoro Transition Authority during the transition period. Xxx

**WHEREAS,** the BTA approved in its plenary session, Adopted Resolution No. 268, or the Resolution Providing for Rules, Procedures and Practices of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) Parliament, which guides the conduct of all sessions, committee hearings and meetings, and other similar activities of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA)¹;

**WHEREAS,** Rule VIII of Adopted Resolution No. 268 provides for the "Parliamentary Order of Business" wherein all the matters to be addressed during a specific session are laid down;

**WHEREAS,** many of the resolutions filed by the Members of the Parliament (MPs) give recognition and commendation to acknowledge the different kinds of achievements, may it be a Bangsamoro or not. In other cases, resolutions are also filed in order to extend condolences to the bereaved families;

**WHEREAS,** all these measures when included in the Order of Business of the Parliament are tackled in the plenary. It even goes through legislative process such as the period of interpellation and period of amendment which may be time consuming; and

**WHEREAS,** it is better to allocate a specific time for each of the Members of the Parliament that wishes to give recognition, commendation or extend its condolences instead of the MPs filing it as a resolution.

**NOW THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED, as it is hereby resolved** by the BTA Parliament, to amend Rule VIII of Adopted Resolution No. 268, to read as follows:

"**Rule VIII. - Parliamentary Order of Business**"

**Section 1. Order of Business.** – On any session day of the Parliament, each Member of the Parliament shall be furnished with a copy of the Order of Business.

The daily Order of Business shall be as follows:

(a) Call to Order;
(b) Invocation or Prayer;
(c) National Anthem;
(d) Bangsamoro Hymn;
(e) Roll Call;
(f) Reading and Approval of Journal of the Previous Session;
(g) Reference of Business:
(1) Bills on First Reading; and
(2) Resolutions;
(h) Bills on Second Reading:
(1) Committee Reports on Bills;
(2) Period of Interpellations;
(3) Period of Amendments; and
(4) Approval of Second Reading.
(i) Resolutions Referred to the Committee:
(1) Committee Reports;
(2) Period of Interpellations;
(3) Period of Amendments; and
(4) Approval.
(j) Unfinished Business;
(k) Privilege Hour;
(l) Question Hours; and
(m) Messages, Recognitions, Commendations, Memorials and Communications; and
(n) Bills on Third Reading.

On the first Wednesday of every quarter, the Order of Business shall include the Chief Minister’s Hour immediately after the Roll Call.

In case of Special Session, the Order of Business as communicated shall be strictly in accordance with the purpose of the request of the Chief Minister or the order of the Speaker.

**Section 2. Giving of Recognition, Commendation and Extending of Condolences.** – Members of Parliament who wishes to give recognition and commendation shall notify the Office of the Floor leader one to three (1-3) days before the commencement of session which shall be included in the Order of Business.

Each MP shall then be given three to five (3-5) minutes to deliver speech during the plenary session.

**Section 3. Manner of Dissemination.** – The daily Order of Business shall be posted on the websites of the Parliament and sent through electronic mail the Members. As far as practicable, such Order of Business shall be sent at least three (3) days before the commencement of session.

**Section 4. Amendment of the Order of Business.** – Any Member of the Parliament may, after the Roll Call, move for an amendment of the Order of Business. If no amendment is raised, it shall be deemed adopted.

Adopted,

**ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Author

_________________________
¹ https://parliament.bangsamoro.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/AR-268-House-Rules-as-of-March-14-2023-4.36-PM-FONTSIZE-12-WITH-SIGN.pdf
