Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

**SECOND REGULAR SESSION**

**PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534**

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduced by Principal Authors:
**HON. RASOL YAP MITMUG, JR.**

Co-authors:

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**A RESOLUTION EARNESTLY REQUESTING THE MINISTRY OF BASIC, HIGHER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION (MBHTE) TO CREATE A TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP (TWG), TO CRAFT A PEACE EDUCATION MODULES WHICH INCLUDES, UNDERSTANDING THE ISRAELI - PALESTINIAN CONFLICT, WHICH WILL BE INTEGRATED IN THE CURRICULUM OF JUNIOR AND SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS IN ALL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS**

**WHEREAS,** the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was reignited once again on October 7, 2023 when the Israeli Defense Force intensified airstrikes over Palestinian people in Gaza in retaliation to a surprise offensive launched by Hamas militant group against Israel;

**WHEREAS,** this is a new deadly chapter in a conflict that has its roots deep more than seven decades ago;

**WHEREAS,** in the opinion of the Former Member of Bangsamoro Parliament Mussolini Lidasan, there are some similarities between the Bangsamoro conflict in Mindanao and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Both conflicts have deep historical roots, dating back several decades¹;

**WHEREAS,** the Israeli-Palestinian conflict emerged from disputes over land ownership and self-determination following the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948. Similarly, the conflict in Mindanao has its origins in the struggles for SELF-DETERMINATION and LAND RIGHTS of the Bangsamoro people, including the indigenous peoples, which traces back to the Spanish colonization period. Moreover, these conflicts revolve around competing claims to specific territories. In the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the primary contention is over the lands of Israel and Palestine, with disputes over borders, settlements, and access to resources. In Mindanao, the Bangsamoro and indigenous groups have long sought recognition of their ancestral domains and control over lands that they consider historically theirs, leading to clashes with the government and other non-Muslim settlers;

**WHEREAS,** while there are similarities, it is important to note that the specific dynamics, historical backgrounds, and geopolitical contexts of the Bangsamoro conflict in Mindanao and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are unique to their respective regions. Both conflicts are complex and have multifaceted issues with various elements, including religious, political, historical, and geopolitical factors. While religion plays a significant role, it is important to note that the conflict is not solely driven by religious differences and should not be oversimplified as a religious one. Geopolitics, or the study of the influence of geography, power, and political factors on international relations, is a crucial framework for understanding these conflicts. This framework often involves power imbalances²;

**WHEREAS,** incorporating this understanding into peace education can shed light on how power dynamics can perpetuate conflicts. This knowledge can empower young people to address inequalities and work towards more just and equitable solutions;

**WHEREAS,** the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) has issued memoranda that support the integration of peace education into higher education curricula. These include CHED Memorandum Order (CMO) No. 1, s. 2019, which calls for the integration of peace education/studies into relevant higher education curricula, and CMO No. 42, s. 2021, which recommended guiding principles and practices on peace education for higher education institutions;

**WHEREAS,** the Ministry of Basic, Higher and Technical Education (MBHTE) has a crucial role to play in shaping the future of our society and by infusing peace education into the curriculum, it will nurture a generation that prioritizes peace, unity, and the welfare of their communities;

**NOW, THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED,** as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, to earnestly request the **MINISTRY OF BASIC, HIGHER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION (MBHTE)** to create a Technical Working Group (TWG), to craft a Peace Education Modules which includes, understanding the Israeli - Palestinian conflict, which will be integrated in the curriculum of junior and senior high school students in all public and private educational institutions.

Adopted,

AUTHOR:

**HON. RASOL YAP MITMUG, JR.**

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested:

**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

_________________________
¹ https://www.sunstar.com.ph/davao/lidasan-the-bangsamoro-and-the-israel-palestine-conflict
² https://www.sunstar.com.ph/davao/lidasan-the-bangsamoro-and-the-israel-palestine-conflict
