Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Parliament
First Regular Session
Resolution No. **587**

Introduced by: **MP KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., MD, DPBO**

Co-authors: **MP ATTY. UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP ABDULLAH B. HASHIM, MP AKMAD I. ABAS, MP HARON M. ABAS, MP BASSIT S. ABBAS, MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO, MP DR. HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN, MP ABDULLAH E. GAYAK, MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN, MP JAMEL B. MACACUA, MP ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, MP HAMID U. MALIK, MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG, MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG, MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI, MP NURREDHA I. MISUARI, MP SUWAIB L. ORANON, MP ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, MP RAMON A. PIANG JR., MP SAID Z. SALENDAB, MP ALI O. SALIK, MP SAID M. SHEIK, MP ALI B. SOLAIMAN, MP BASSIR D. UTTO**

**RESOLUTION**
**CONGRATULATING AND COMMENDING THE BANGSAMORO TOPNOTCHERS IN THE MAY 2024 LICENSURE EXAMINATION FOR CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS, AND ALL BANGSAMORO PASSERS**

**WHEREAS**, on the 1st day of June 2024, the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) officially released the results of the May 2024 Licensure Examination for Certified Public Accountants, conducted across the various testing centers nationwide from May 26 to 28, 2024.

**WHEREAS**, out of 10,421 examinees, 3,155 or 30.275% passed the said licensure examination given by the Board of Accountancy in National Capital Region, Baguio, Butuan, Cagayan de Oro, Cebu, Davao, Iloilo, Koronadal, Legazpi, Lucena, Pagadian, Pampanga, Rosales, Tacloban, Tuguegarao, Zamboanga and Puerto Princesa, Palawan.

**WHEREAS**, out of the successful passers, three (3) of them are young Bangsamoro, who garnered highest scores and ranked as topnotchers, namely:

1. Mr. Abdel-Nasher Sarail Tanggor (Top 7), with a general average of 89.67%
2. Ms. Norjannah Khalid Tanoga (Top 7), with a general average of 89.67%
3. Mr. Rustom Dipaling Lamosao (Top 10), with a general average of 89.17%

**WHEREAS**, Mr. Tanggor, a graduate of Mindanao State University - Iligan Institute of Technology (MSU-IIT) and resident of Bayang, Lanao del Sur; Ms Tanoga, a graduate from Mindanao State University, (MSU) Marawi City and resident of Tanghal Subdivision, Bagua 2, Cotabato City, and Mr. Lamosao, a graduate of Notre Dame University (NDU) and resident of Rosary Heights 5, Cotabato City;

**WHEREAS**, being included in the top 10 in any given licensure examination is a rare and prestigious achievement that gives utmost pride and honor not only to the family, school, and tribe, but to the entire Bangsamoro community;

**WHEREAS**, their exemplary performance as topnotchers serve as an inspiration for the Bangsamoro children, youth, and all individuals who are striving for excellence, not only in the Bangsamoro region but also in the entire country;

**NOW THEREFORE**, be it **RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, To congratulate and commend the three (3) topnotchers in the May 2024 Certified Public Accountants Licensure Exam (CPALE), and all Bangsamoro passers;

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, That the copy of this Resolution be forwarded to Mr. Abdel-Nasher Sarail Tanggor, Ms. Norjannah Khalid Tanoga, and Mr. Rustom Dipaling Lamosao.

**ADOPTED,**

Author:

(Sgd.)
**KADIL M. SINOLINDING JR., MD, DPBO**
Member of the Parliament

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested By:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker
