Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

Third Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 542**

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Introduced by**
MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA

**Co-Authored by:**
MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, CESE; MP. Rasu E. Ismael, EMDRCM, MP Atty. Rasol Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; MP Michael E. Midtimbang; MP Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod; MP Khalid Ma-Ampor Hadji Abdullah; MP Bassir. D. Utto; and MP Ali B. Sangki

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**RESOLUTION**
**STRONGLY REQUESTING THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, THROUGH THE CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES, TO EXTEND THE ALLOCATION OF THE SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT FUND (SDF) FOR THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM) TO ANOTHER 10 YEARS FROM 2029 TO 2039**

**WHEREAS,** Republic Act No. 11054, or the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL), which enabled the creation the new Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, provides several provisions on relief, rehabilitation, and the development of Muslim Mindanao conflict-affected areas;

**WHEREAS,** Section 1, Article XIV of the BOL provides that the Bangsamoro Government with funding support from the National Government, shall intensify development efforts for the rehabilitation, reconstruction, and development of the Bangsamoro Region as part of the normalization process. It shall formulate and implement a program for rehabilitation and development that will address the needs of Moro Islamic Liberation Front/Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Force members and its decommissioned women auxiliary force, Moro National Liberation Front/ Bangsamoro Armed Forces members, and address the needs of internally displaced persons, widows and orphans, and poverty-stricken communities. It shall observe, promote, and ensure gender-responsiveness in all aspects of security and peace building, including the participation of women in decision-making;

**WHEREAS,** Section 2, Article XIV of the BOL states that the National Government shall provide a special development fund to the Bangsamoro Government for the rebuilding, rehabilitation, and development of its conflict-affected communities.

The amount equivalent to Fifty billion pesos (P50,000,000,000.00), at Five billion pesos (P5,000,000,000.00) per year, for a period of ten (10) years from the ratification of this Organic Law, shall be allocated for this purpose.

The utilization of the funds shall be in accordance with the Bangsamoro Development Plan to be adopted by the Bangsamoro Government, as provided in Section 6, Article XIII of this Organic Law.

**WHEREAS,** Section 6, Article XIII of the BOL provides that to ensure the Bangsamoro Development Plans are reflected in the National Development Plans, a representative of the Bangsamoro Government shall sit as member of a National Development Plan Steering Committee or its equivalent and shall participate in relevant planning activities of the National Economic and Development Authority;

**WHEREAS,** the initial implementation of the Special Development Fund (SDF) by ministries, offices, and agencies in 2020 to 2021 have been significantly affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic, but nevertheless showed rapid progress in implementation in the succeeding years;

**WHEREAS,** the extent of complete rehabilitation and development in the BARMM now requires more than the allocated sum of fifty billion pesos for 10 years;

**WHEREAS,** it is for this reason that the Members of Parliament deem it right and urgent to request another 10-year period for the extension of the Special Development Fund from 2029 to 2039;

**WHEREAS,** the early submission of this Resolution to both Houses of Congress is in anticipation of the long legislative processes and procedures taken by the Congress in the final passage and approval of a particular bill;

**WHEREAS,** the necessary requirements in order to push this Resolution shall be initiated by the Bangsamoro Economic and Development Council (BEDC) as the planning, monitoring, and coordinating agency of the Bangsamoro Government and the Bangsamoro Planning and Development Authority (BPDA) as its support office;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED** by the BTA Parliament to pass and approve this Resolution: A Resolution Strongly Requesting the National Government Through the Congress of the Philippines to Extend the Allocation of the Special Development Fund for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to Another 10 Years from 2029 to 2039.

**BE IT RESOLVED FURTHER,** that a copy of this Resolution be furnished to the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines for consideration and to the Office of the Chief Minister and the BPDA for its information and appropriate action.

Resolution passed this ___ day of ___ 2024, Cotabato City, Philippines.

Adopted,

**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA**
Author
