Republic of the Philippines
BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Cotabato City

**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

**Proposed Resolution No. 73**

Introduced by Principal Authors:
**MP RASOL YAP MITMUG, JR., MP AMILBAHAR MAWALLIL, MP LAISA MASUHUD ALAMIA, MP SUHARTO MASTURA AMBOLODTO, MP BAINTAN ADIL AMPATUAN, MP RASUL ENDEREZ ISMAEL, MP DON MUSTAPHA LOONG**

Co-authors:

**A RESOLUTION CONGRATULATING HONORABLE CARLITO GUANSING GALVEZ, JR. FOR HIS WELL - DESERVED REAPPOINTMENT AS PRESIDENTIAL ADVISER ON PEACE, RECONCILIATION AND UNITY OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT**

WHEREAS, on December 12, 2018, Mr. Carlito Guansing Galvez, Jr. was appointed by President Rodrigo Duterte as Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process;

WHEREAS, it was Under Secretary Galvez that the Bangsamoro Organic Law was ratified and enabled the creation of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao;

WHEREAS, after President Duterte’s term ended, Mr. Galvez remained presidential adviser under a "holdover capacity";

WHEREAS, Mr. Galvez, even in a holdover capacity, managed to help push for stakeholders to sustain the gains of the peace process. It was under his term that the new members of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority were sworn into their posts;

WHEREAS, Mr. Galvez was instrumental in the unification of different Moro Fronts who now work together for the Bangsamoro People, under the Bangsamoro Government;

WHEREAS, recently, Mr. Galvez was reappointed by President Bongbong Marcos as the Presidential Adviser on the Peace, Reconciliation and Unity of the Office of the President;

WHEREAS, Mr. Galvez is a staunch advocate of the peace process with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, and has been well received by many Bangsamoro stakeholders;

WHEREAS, Mr. Galvez has played a major role in advancing the Bangsamoro peace process in his term as presidential adviser on peace, reconciliation and unity of President Rodrigo Duterte;

WHEREAS, he has also personally contributed to the absence of major conflict since the Marawi Siege in 2017 which has led to the increase of economic activity across the Bangsamoro region;

WHEREAS, accordingly, Mr. Galvez has shown a laudable commitment and professionalism in peacebuilding efforts in the Bangsamoro Region;

WHEREAS, in view of his dedication and service to the Bangsamoro People as presidential adviser on the Peace Process, he is worthy of our commendation and appreciation for his well-earned reappointment;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as it is hereby RESOLVED by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to congratulate Honorable Carlito Guansing Galvez, Jr. for his well - deserved reappointment as presidential adviser on peace, reconciliation and unity of the office of the president.

Adopted,

AUTHORS:

(Sgd.)
**MP RASOL YAP MITMUG, JR.**                                  **MP AMILBAHAR MAWALLIL**

**MP LAISA MASUHUD ALAMIA**                      **MP SUHARTO MASTURA AMBOLODTO**

**MP BAINTAN ADIL AMPATUAN**                                 **MP RASUL ENDEREZ ISMAEL**

**MP DON MUSTAPHA LOONG**

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
*Secretary General*

Attested:

**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
*Speaker*
