Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

Parliament PB No. **174**

**AN ACT MANDATING THE CREATION OF BARANGAY JUSTICE SYSTEM MULTISECTORAL TRADITIONAL AND CUSTOMARY LAWS ADVISORY COUNCIL**

*Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament in session assembled:*

**SECTION 1. Policy.** – It is the policy of the Bangsamoro to ensure that the customs, beliefs and traditions of the Bangsamoro People are recognized, respected, and guaranteed. The Bangsamoro shall promote unity, peace, justice, and goodwill among all peoples, as well as encourage a just and peaceful resolution of disputes.

**SECTION 2. Creation of the Barangay Justice System Multi-Sectoral Traditional and Customary Laws Advisory Council.** – There is hereby created in every barangay of every city and municipality a Barangay Justice System Multi-Sectoral Traditional and Customary Laws Advisory Council hereinafter referred to as the “Council”, to be composed of the following: City or Municipal Mayor, as Chairman, a representative from the City or Municipal Police Office, Purok leader, Traditional leader, Religious leader, Indigenous people’s leader, tribal leader, women representative, youth representative and persons with disabilities, each coming from their respective Barangay.

**SECTION 3. Functions.** – Without prejudice to the provisions of the Katarungang Pambarangay Law, the council shall have the following functions:

    a. To provide specialized information, skills, and experience on the existing traditional and customary laws of the community to aid the barangay justice system implementers in settling local disputes;

    b. To provide guidance, technical advice, and critical thinking in areas beyond the Lupon members’ typical fields of expertise in settling local disputes;

    c. To encourage retirees from the government or private sector to become part of the Barangay Justice System;

    d. To provide the barangay justice system the customary and traditional laws that may not have been in use for reasons of non-practice; and

    e. To act as the organization’s advocate in the barangay, it serves to help the barangay justice system connect to a greater constituency in the barangay.

**SECTION 4. Constitution of the Council.** – Within six (6) months after the approval of this Act, all city and municipal mayors shall convene the Council to implement the provisions of this Act. The members of the council shall not receive any remuneration in the performance of their duties.

**SECTION 5. Repealing Clause.** – All regional laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations, other issuances, or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

**SECTION 6. Separability Clause.** – If, for any reason, any provision of this act shall be held to be unconstitutional or invalid, no other provision hereof shall be affected thereby.

**SECTION 7. Effectivity.** – This act shall take effect fifteen days (15) after its complete publication in at least two (2) regional newspapers of general circulation.

**APPROVED**,

Author:

(Sgd.)
**HON. MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authors:

**HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA**
**HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG**
**HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN**
**HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG**
**HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
**HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO**
**HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL**
**HON. MP ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM**
**HON. MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN**
**HON. MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO**
**HON. MP SUWAIB L. ORANON**
**HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN**
**HON. MP EDDIE M. ALIH**
**HON. MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT**
**HON. MP NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN**
**HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**
**HON. MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI**
**HON. MP NURREDHA I. MISUARI**

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

