Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Parliament PB No. 126**

Authored by:
**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA**

Co-Authors:
MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, MPSA; MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Rasul E. Ismael; MP Khalid Ma-Amor Hadji Abdullah; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; and MP Bassir D. Utto

**AN ACT**
**DECLARING THE DIMAPATOY WATERSHED IN DATU ODIN SINSUAT MUNICIPALITY, MAGUINDANAO DEL NORTE, AS A PROTECTED AREA IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM), DEFINING PRESERVATION MEASURES, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES, PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) interim Parliament

**Section 1. Short Title.** - This Act shall be known as "**Dimapatoy Protected Area Act of 2022**".

**Section 2. Declaration of Policy.** – As a matter of policy, the Bangsamoro Government is empowered to declare natural resources and aquatic parks, forest, watershed reservation, and other protected areas in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The Parliament shall pass a law to establish protected areas, the procedure for the declaration and management thereof, and the role of the Bangsamoro Government and other stakeholders in the process: provided, that protected areas to be declared within the ancestral domains shall be subject to the free, prior and informed consent of the non-Moro indigenous people.

**Section 3. Dimapatoy Watershed as Protected Area.** – Consistent with the provisions of Section 8, Article XIII of R.A. No. 11054, the Dimapatoy Watershed in Datu Odin Sinsuat, Maguindanao del Norte is hereby declared as Protected Area in BARMM.

**Section 4. Protective Measures.** - In accordance with this act, the following protection and preservation measures are hereby adopted:

a) Annual tree planning inside and in the adjacent areas of the Dimapatoy Watershed shall be done by the Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources and Energy (MENRE) in collaboration with the Datu Odin Sinsuat-Local Government Units (DOS-LGU); and

b) Deployment of forest guards in the stations at the entry and exit points of the watershed by the MENRE with the support of the DOS-LGU.

**Section 5. Prohibited Acts.** – In accordance with this Act, the following acts are strictly banned, prohibited, or disallowed:

a) Illegal or unauthorized cutting or gathering of trees and plants of any species from the declared watershed area and its environs;

b) Gathering and burning of dried plants and trees within the watershed area and in its surroundings;

c) Open burning of solid waste and other disposable materials within the watershed area;

d) Open dumping and/or burning of biodegradable and non-biodegradable materials and waste in the watershed area;

e) Transport and dumping, in bulk, of collected domestic, industrial, and/or commercial waste in the watershed area other than centers or facilities prescribed for the purpose;

f) Construction or operations of landfills or any waste disposal facility or groundwater reservoir in the watershed area or any portions thereof;

g) Open dumping and/or burning of biodegradable or non-biodegradable materials in flood prone areas within the watershed;

h) Littering, throwing, and/or dumping of waste matters in the surroundings of watershed areas along its roads, canals, parks and establishments or causing or permitting the same;

i) Discharging or depositing any waste pollutant to the water body of the watershed or such which will impede natural flow in the water body;

j) Discharging, injecting, or allowing entry into the soil around the watershed or anything that would pollute groundwater;

k) Discharging regulated water pollutants without the valid required discharge permit from the appropriate agencies pursuant to this Act; and

l) Mining and quarrying activities such as but not limited to mining of fossil fuels, metal ores, and other minerals; and quarrying of stone, sand, and clay.

**Section 6. Violations, Fines and Penalties.** – Omission of any watershed protection measures or violation of any of the prohibitions as enumerated under Sections 4 and 5 of this Act shall be meted with fines and penalties.

The penalties shall within the form of fines or imprisonment or both. The Municipal District Office of the MENRE, in close cooperation with the DOS-LGU, shall determine the offense and the corresponding penalties that shall be meted out and to be implemented by the DOS-LGU.

Any person who violates any of the provisions under Section 5, shall upon conviction, be punished by certain amount or imprisonment within certain number of days as determined by MENRE and DOS-LGU.

The Local Government of DOS shall formulate and specify the penalties and fines through the passage of municipal ordinance by the Sangguniang Bayan of DOS municipality.

**Section 7. Separability Clause.** – In case any provision hereof is declared void and unconstitutional, the other provisions not so declared and affected by such declaration shall remain in force and effect.

**Section 8. Repealing Clause.** – All laws and executive orders which are inconsistent with the provision of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

**Section 9. Effectivity.** – This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following its complete publication in at least one (1) local newspaper of general circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

Adopted,

(Sgd.)
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Author

