Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA PB No.: 197**

Introduced by:
MPs Hashemi N. Dilangalen and Michael E. Midtimbang

Co-authored by:
MPs Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Hamid U. Malik, Atty. Nabil A. Tan, Atty. John Anthony L. Lim, Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod, Mohammad Kelie Antao, Suharto S. Esmael, Hatimil E. Hassan, Marjanie S. Macasalong, Rasul E. Esmael, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Bassir D. Utto, Mudjib C. Abu, Khalid M. Hadji Abdullah, Diamila Disimban-Ramos, Albakil D. Jikiri, and Abdulaziz M. Amenoden

**AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DRUG TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION CENTERS IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO**

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Parliament in session:

**Section 1. Creation.** - There shall be established Drug Treatment and Rehabilitation Centers, herein referred to as “Centers”, in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao which shall be under the supervision of the Ministry of Health.

**Sec. 2. Functions.** - The Centers shall have the following functions:

a) To provide care, treatment, and accommodation to persons found to be drug dependents;
b) To train the drug dependent to be physically, psychologically and socially capable in coping with problems common to peer groups;
c) To facilitate and encourage the dissemination and exchange of ideas and information on the prevention, care, treatment and control of drug addiction;
d) To provide after-care, follow-up, and social reintegration services to enable a drug dependent to adjust to family and community life after his release;
e) To raise public awareness about drug abuse, prevention, care, treatment, and rehabilitation;
f) To undertake continuous training of physicians, nurses, health officers, and social workers on the practical and scientific methods of prevention, care, treatment, and rehabilitation of persons found to be drug dependents; and
g) To perform such other functions as may be necessary to effectively carry out the objectives of this Act;

**Sec. 3. Drug Treatment and Rehabilitation Centers.** – There shall be initially established one (1) Drug Treatment and Rehabilitation Center in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. Additional Centers shall thereafter be established with the recommendation of the Minister of Health;

**Sec. 4. Location.** – The Ministry of Health, in coordination with the Ministry of Public Works, shall determine the location of each Drug Treatment and Rehabilitation Center taking into consideration their accessibility to most drug dependents;

**Sec. 5. Administration, Management and Organization.** — Each drug treatment and rehabilitation center shall be headed by a Chief of Center to be appointed by the Minister of Health.

No person shall be appointed as Chief of Center unless he/she possesses the following qualifications:

a) A Filipino citizen;
b) A resident of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao;
c) At least thirty-five (35) years of age;
d) A physician of good repute; and
e) At least five (5) years of experience in the care, treatment, and rehabilitation of drug dependents

The Ministry of Health, in coordination with the Ministry of Finance, Budget and Management, shall determine the organizational structure and staffing pattern of the Center subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

**Sec. 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations.** – Within one (1) year after the effectivity of this Act, the Minister of Health shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the effective implementation of this Act.

**Sec. 7. Separability Clause.** - The provisions of this Act shall be separable so that if for any reason any provision or part hereof is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act or the provisions not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

**Sec. 8. Repealing Clause.** - All regional laws, executive orders, rules or regulations, or any part thereof, which are inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

**Sec. 9. Effectivity.** - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after the completion of its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

Approved,

AUTHOR:
(Sgd.)
**DR. HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN**
Member of the Parliament

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

