Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**Second Parliament**
Second Regular Session

BTA Parliament
**Proposed PB No. 257**

Introduced by:
**MP SAID M. SHIEK, MP ALI MONTAHA D. BABAO, MP AMROUSSI A.
MACATANONG, MP ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, MP BASIT S. ABBAS, MP
MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN,
and MP ALI B. SOLAIMAN**


**“AN ACT CREATING AND ESTABLISHING A LEVEL 1 GENERAL HOSPITAL TO BE KNOWN AS ALEEM ABDULAZIS S. MIMBANTAS MEMORIAL HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF MASIU, PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES”**

*Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in Parliament assembled:*

**Section 1. Short Title.** — This Act shall be known as the “ALEEM ABDULAZIS S. MIMBANTAS MEMORIAL HOSPITAL ACT OF 2023.”

**Section 2. Declaration of Policy.** — It is a policy of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to provide for a comprehensive and integrated health service delivery for its constituents and establish by law a general hospital system to serve the health requirements of its people and ensure that the individual basic right to life shall be attainable through the prompt intervention of excellent and affordable medical services. Towards this end, and in order to adequately respond to emergencies, disasters and emerging diseases, the Bangsamoro Government shall protect the interest and promote the well-being and the medical needs of the Bangsamoro People.

**Section 3. Aleem Abdulazis S. Mimbantas Memorial Hospital.** – There shall be established, under direct control and supervision of Ministry of Health, a fifty bed capacity general hospital in the Municipality of Masiu, Province of Lanao del Sur, to be known as Aleem Abdulazis S. Mimbantas Memorial Hospital.

Any further increase in bed capacity and upgrading of health care services and facilities shall be based on hospital development plan which shall be prepared by the Ministry of Health to reflect the development goals of the hospital.

**Section 4. Appropriations.** — The Ministry of Health shall immediately include in the Ministry’s program the implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be included in the Bangsamoro Appropriations Act.

**Section 5. Implementing Rules and Regulations.** -- The Ministry of Health shall promulgate the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of this Act within sixty (60) days after the enactment of this Act.

**Section 6. Separability Clause.** -- In the event any provision of this Act is declared invalid, the remainder of this Act shall not be affected by such declaration.

**Section 7. Effectivity.** - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper of regional circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

Author:
(Sgd.)
**MP SAID M. SHIEK**
Member of Parliament

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary-General

Attested by:

**ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

Approved:

**HON. AHOD BALAWAG EBRAHIM**
Chief Minister

