Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

Third Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
BTA Parliament PB No. **328**

Introduced by:
MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan; MP Atty Omar Yasser C. Sema; MP Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod; MP Baileng Mantawil; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia; MP Atty. Paisalin P. Tago; MP Michael E. Midtimbang; MP Khalid Ma-Ampor Hadji Abdullah; MP Ramon Piang, Sr.; MP Suharto Esmael; MP Susana S. Anayatin; MP Tarhata Maglangit; MP Eddie Alih; MP Atty. Jose I. Lorena; MP Froilyn T. Mendoza; MP Jamel B. Macacua; MP Rasul Enderez Ismael; MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong; and MP Ali Sangki


**AN ACT**
**RENAMING THE MUNICIPALITY OF DATU BLAH T. SINSUAT, MAGUINDANAO DEL NORTE TO MUNICIPALITY OF WEST UPI, MAGUINDANAO DEL NORTE**

*Be it enacted by the Parliament of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao assembled:*

**Section 1. Change of Name.** – The Municipality of Datu Blah Sinsuat in the Province of Maguindanao del Norte is hereby renamed as Municipality of West Upi, Maguindanao del Norte.

**Section 2. Declaration of Policy.** – It is hereby the declared policy of the Bangsamoro Government that its territorial and political subdivisions shall enjoy genuine and meaningful local autonomy to enable them to attain their fullest development as self-reliant communities and to make them more effective partners in the attainment of regional developmental goals.

**Section 3. Conduct and Supervision of Plebiscite.** – The renaming of the municipality of Datu Blah T. Sinsuat as the municipality of West Upi shall be subject to ratification by a majority of the votes cast by qualified voters in a plebiscite to be conducted in the present municipality of Datu Blah T. Sinsuat.

The Commission on Elections (COMELEC) shall conduct and supervise the plebiscite in compliance with Section 13 (g) of Republic Act No. 7160, as amended, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991.

The expenses for the plebiscites shall be borne by the Bangsamoro Government.

**Section 4. Repealing Clause.** – Muslim Mindanao Autonomy Act No. 198, creating the Municipality of Datu Blah T. Sinsuat, is hereby amended. All other laws, orders, rules, and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed, modified, superseded, or amended accordingly.

**Section 5. Effectivity.** – This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following its complete publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

Adopted,

(Signature)
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Author

