Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT**
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
__________ Regular Session
**PROPOSED PB No. 314**

**Introduced By:** MP Suharto S. Esmael, MSc

**Co-authors:** MPs Tawakal B. Midtimbang , Michael E. Midtimbang, Princess Maleiha B. Candao, Jamel B. Macacua, Ali B. Solaiman, Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Nabila Margarita P. Pangandama, Matarul M. Estino, Albakil D. Jikiri, Dr. Hashemi N. Dilangalen, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Amroussi Macatanong, Atty. Nabil A. Tan

**AN ACT**
**INSTITUTIONALIZING THE GRANT OF BENEFITS AND INCENTIVES TO ACCREDITED AND ACTIVE BARANGAY HEALTH WORKERS IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO AND PROVIDING FUNDS THERFOR**

*Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament*

**Section 1. Short Title.** - This Act shall be known as the “BARMM's Barangay Health Workers Act.”

**Section 2. Statement of Policy.** - The State shall protect and promote the right to health of the people and to provide conditions for health empowerment, where each individual has access to information and services that will bring about health and well-being. The Primary Health Care Approach is recognized as the major strategy towards health empowerment, emphasizing the need to provide accessible and acceptable health services through participatory strategies such as health education training of barangay health workers, community building and organizing Towards this end, this Act shall provide incentives to communities and act as frontliners in the Primary Health Care Approach.

The government and all its instrumentalities shall also recognize the rights of barangay health workers to organize themselves; to strengthen and systematize their services for their community; and to make a venue for sharing their experiences and for recommending policies and guidelines for the promotion, maintenance and advancement of their activities and services.

Bangsamoro Autonomous Region adheres to the declared policy of the State as provided in Section 2 of Republic Act No. 7883, otherwise known as the “Barangay Health Workers' Benefits and Incentives Act of 1995”.

BARMM likewise recognizes the work of the Barangay Health Workers as a property right within the contemplation of the 1987 Philippine Constitution.

**SECTION 3. Honorarium.** In addition to the institutionalization of the current monthly honorarium of three thousand pesos (P3,000.00) per month, without prejudice to further increasing the same in the future after a thorough review of their works and should the BARMM budget so permits, the Barangay Health Workers beneficiaries shall likewise be entitled to a year-end financial assistance equivalent to their monthly honorarium.

**Section 4. Beneficiaries.** – Under this Act, the beneficiaries shall be the Barangay Health Workers registered with the local health board in the city or municipality in which they render voluntary service and currently receiving benefits and incentives provided by the BAR government.

The local health board, through the provincial health boards in the case of municipalities, shall furnish a copy of such registry to the Ministry of Health, which is hereby mandated to maintain a regional register of barangay health workers.

**SECTION 5. Special Financial Assistance.** - Upon reaching the age of sixty (60) years or at later years if further allowed to serve by the Municipal Health Officer (MHO) and thereafter opts to end his/her voluntary service, the concerned Accredited Barangay Health Worker who has rendered at least ten (15) years of service shall be entitled to a special financial assistance computed at least one half of the monthly honorarium he/she is receiving for every year of service.

**SECTION 6. Appropriation.** - The amount of three thousand pesos (P3,000.00) currently provided for Barangay Health Workers is hereby appropriated and institutionalized.

**SECTION 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations.** – The Ministry of Health, in cooperation with the Provincial Health Offices and City Health Offices, shall formulate, within sixty (60) days from its effectivity, the rules and regulations necessary to implement this Act.

**SECTION 8. Separability Clause.** – If any provision of this Act is declared invalid, the remainder or any provision hereof not affected thereby shall remain in force and effect.

**SECTION 9. Repealing Clause.** – All regional laws, decrees, executive orders and other presidential issuances which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

**SECTION 10. Effectivity-** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.

Approved, ____/ ____/ 2024

Author:
(Sgd.)
**Suharto S. Esmael, MSc**
Member of the Parliament

