Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Third Parliament
4th Regular Session

BTA PB No. **397**

Introduced by:
MP Atty. Naguib G. Sinarimbo

**AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL IN THE CITY OF COTABATO, TO BE KNOWN AS BANGSAMORO CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in Parliament assembled:

**SECTION 1. Short Title.** — This Act shall be known as the "Bangsamoro Children’s Hospital Act of 2025."

**SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy.** — It is the policy of the Bangsamoro Government to protect and promote the right to health of the children and instill health consciousness among its people.

**SECTION 3. The Bangsamoro Children’s Hospital.** — There shall be established under the direct supervision of the Ministry of Health (MOH), a children’s hospital in the City of Cotabato, to be known as the Bangsamoro Children’s Hospital (BCH). It shall be authorized to operate a two-hundred (200)-bed capacity hospital dedicated to children’s requirements.

**SECTION 4. Mandate.** — The hospital shall specialize on the care of children and shall focus children health care, prenatal testing, pediatric care, nutrition services, immunization services, education classes for parenting, and children’s health awareness.

**SECTION 5. Development Goals of BCH.** — The MOH shall develop a hospital development plan to reflect the development goals of the hospital including its bed capacity and service capability, request for the staffing requirements, capital outlay investments and budgetary needs for operations shall be based on the hospital development plan.

**SECTION 6. Funding of BCH.** — The Bangsamoro Government through the MOH shall provide funding for the establishment and operation of the BCH. The Minister of Health shall include in the Ministry’s subsidy program, support for the capital outlays, maintaining operation and other expenses, and personnel services expenses of the said hospital.

**SECTION 7. Separability Clause.** — If any provision or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provision not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

**SECTION 8. Effectivity.** — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Bangsamoro Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation within the BARMM.

Author:

(Sgd.)
**ATTY. NAGUIB G. SINARIMBO**
Member of the Parliament

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested By:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker

