Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**SECOND PARLIAMENT**
First Regular Session

Parliament PB No. 46

Introduced by
MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL, ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM, EDDIE M. ALIH, ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO

Co-authored by
MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN, ATTY. LAISA M. ALAMIA, ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG, JR., RASUL E. ISMAEL

**AN ACT**
**ESTABLISHING A LEVEL I GENERAL HOSPITAL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF SITANGKAI, PROVINCE OF TAWI-TAWI, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Parliament in session:

**Section 1.** There is hereby established a Level I general hospital with fifty (50) bed capacity in the Municipality of Sitangkai, Province of Tawi-Tawi, under the direct administrative and technical supervision of the Tawi-Tawi Integrated Provincial Health Office (IPHO).

**Section 2.** The BARMM Ministry of Health (MOH) shall formulate the necessary guidelines for its operations as a level I hospital and ensure funding for the construction of the hospital building and other complementary infrastructure, facilities, and medical equipment, as well as the costs for the necessary maintenance and personnel services.

**Section 3.** The Chief of Hospital of Sitangkai General Hospital, in consultation and coordination with the Tawi-Tawi IPHO, shall submit to the MOH an annual development plan to reflect the developmental goals of the hospital every year. The medical personnel, capital outlays and budgetary needs for the operation of Sitangkai General Hospital shall be based on the annual hospital development plan.

Any future increase in bed capacity and upgrading of health care services and the facility shall be consistent with the annual hospital development plan.

**Section 4.** The provisions of this Act are hereby declared separable, and in the event one or more such provisions or part thereof are declared unconstitutional, such declaration of unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the other provisions thereof.

**Section 5.** All regional laws, acts, decrees, executive orders, proclamations, and/or administrative regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby amended, modified, superseded, or repealed accordingly.

**Section 6.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the region.

Approved,

AUTHOR:

(Sgd.)
**AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
Member of the Parliament

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary-General

Attested by:

**ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

