# AM-P-02-1572

**BIENVENIDO R. MERCADO vs. NESTOR CASIDA, SHERIFF III, ETC.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: BIENVENIDO R. MERCADO vs. NESTOR CASIDA, SHERIFF III, ETC.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Resolution
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2002/apr2002/am_p-02-1572_2002.html)

---

> SECOND DIVISION
>
> **A.M. No. P-02-1572      April 24, 2002
> (formerly OCA I.P.I. No. 01-1034-P)**
>
> **BIENVENIDO R. MERCADO,** complainant,
>
> vs.
> **NESTOR CASIDA, SHERIFF III, METROPOLITAN TRIAL COURT, PASIG CITY,** respondent.
>
> **R E S O L U T I O N**
>
> **DE LEON, JR., *J.:***
>
> For resolution is an administrative complaint filed by complainant Bienvenido R. Mercado, Director of Sta. Clara Management and Realty Co., Inc., against respondent Nestor Casida, Sheriff III of the Metropolitan Trial Court of Pasig City, charging the latter with grave misconduct in the implementation of a writ of execution issued by the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB) in HLURB Case No. REM-111199-10770 entitled "Spouses Jesus and Ester Rana, Ma. Lourdes Martinez, Marilou Avila and Ronaldo Rana vs. Sta. Clara Management and Realty Company, Inc."
>
> The said writ of execution was issued pursuant to a Decision rendered by the HLURB, the dispositive portion of which reads as follows:
>
> WHEREFORE PREMISES CONSIDERED, JUDGMENT IS HEREBY RENDERED IN FAVOR OF THE COMPLAINANTS AND ORDERING THE RESPONDENT STA. CLARA MANAGEMENT AND REALTY COMPANY, INCORPORATED TO IMMEDIATELY REFUND TO THE COMPLAINANTS AS FOLLOWS:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | JESUS/ESTER RANA | P637,598.00 |
> | MA. LOURDES MARTINEZ | 255,000.00 |
> | MARILOU AVILA | 30,000.00 |
> | RONALDO RANA | 30,000.00 |
