# Executive Order No. 344

**INCREASING THE BENEFITS FOR MEDICAL/DENTAL PRACTITIONERS FEES PROVIDED FOR UNDER THE PHILIPPINE MEDICAL CARE PLAN**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 344
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1989/eo_344_1989.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 344 January 13, 1989**
>
> INCREASING THE BENEFITS FOR MEDICAL/DENTAL PRACTITIONERS' FEES PROVIDED FOR UNDER THE PHILIPPINE MEDICAL CARE PLAN
>
> WHEREAS, actuarial studies show that without increasing contributions, current benefits under the Philippine Medical Care Plan, otherwise known as the Medicare Program, can be increased for certain items only for the two sectors of beneficiaries covered;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. The benefits for Medical/Dental Practitioners' Fees provided for under the Philippine Medical Care Plan to medicare beneficiaries covered by the Social Security System and Government Service Insurance System is hereby increased from P15.00 per day to P20.00 per day but not to exceed the rate provided for in Executive Order No. 106, "Restructuring The Medical Care Benefits Under the Philippine Medical Care Plan".
>
> Sec. 2. This Executive Order No. 106 dated November 24, 1986 is hereby amended accordingly.
>
> Sec. 3. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.
>
>
>
