# Executive Order No. 353

**REDUCING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CEMENT AND CLINKER UNDER PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1464, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978, AS AMENDED**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 353
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1989/eo_353_1989.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 353 March 27, 1989**
>
> REDUCING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CEMENT AND CLINKER UNDER PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1464, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978, AS AMENDED
>
> WHEREAS, the improving political and economic climate in the country has resulted in a marked increase in domestic construction activity;
>
> WHEREAS, the construction boom has trigerred a sharp demand for construction materials, particularly cement which local production cannot adequately meet in the short run;
>
> WHEREAS, the shortage can be remedied only by importation;
>
> WHEREAS, the import duties on cement and clinker, an essential input therefor, have an impact on the prices of such commodities; and
>
> WHEREAS, to ensure the availability of cement and to stabilize the price of this basic construction material, there is a need to reduce the import duties on these products.
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Section 401 of Presidential Decree No. 1464, as amended, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. The rates of import duty on cement and clinker under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code, as amended, are hereby modified as follows:
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | H.S. Hdg. | Description of Article | Rate of Duty (%) |
> | 25.33 | Portland cement, aluminous cement ("ciment fondu"), slag cement, supersulphate cement and similar hydraulic cements, whether or not coloured or in the form of clinkers. |  |
> | 2523.10 00 | Cement clinkers: |  |
> | 2523.10 10 | CEMENT CLINKER OTHER THAN FOR WHITE CEMENT | 10% UNTIL DEC. 1991 20% 1 JAN. 1992 |
> | 2523.10 90 | CLINKER FOR WHITE CEMENT | 40% |
> |  | Portland Cement: |  |
> | 2523.21 00 | . . . |  |
> | 2523.29 00 | Other | 20% UNTIL DEC. 1991 |
> | 2523.30 |  | 30% 1 JAN. 1992 |
> | 2523.30 | . . . |  |
> | 2523.90 00 | Other hydraulic cements | 20% UNTIL DEC. 1991 30% 1 JAN. 1992 |
>
> Sec. 2. Upon effectivity of this Executive Order, the above articles which are entered or withdrawn from warehouses in the Philippines for consumption shall be subject to the rates of duty herein prescribed.
>
> Sec. 3. All orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> Sec. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect thirty (30) days after date hereof.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.
>
>
>
