# Executive Order No. 361

**SUSPENDING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 782, SERIES OF 1982, IN ADDITION TO THE PROVISIONS THEREOF SUSPENDED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 354, SERIES OF 1989**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 361
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1989/eo_361_1989.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 361 June 22, 1989**
>
> SUSPENDING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 782, SERIES OF 1982, IN ADDITION TO THE PROVISIONS THEREOF SUSPENDED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 354, SERIES OF 1989
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 354, Series of 1989, suspended the provisions of Section 2, paragraph 3 and 4 of Executive Order No. 782, Series of 1982, and the provisions of Section 2 (2) (b) thereof insofar as used diesel engines are concerned, for the purpose of alleviating the shortage of buses, trucks and engines;
>
> WHEREAS, to achieve the said purpose it is necessary to suspend likewise the provisions of Executive Order No. 782 which prescribe the gross vehicular weights (GVW) and age of used trucks that can be imported, as well as the provisions which prescribe the capacity and age of used gasoline engines that can be imported;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby suspended:
>
> Sec. 1. The implementation of Section 2 (2) (a) and Section 2 (2) (b) of Executive Order No. 782, quoted below, are hereby suspended:
>
> "a. Used Trucks with rated gross vehicular weights (GVW) greater than 40,000 lbs. and of models not more than six (6) years old."
>
> "b. Used diesel, gasoline engines with rated capacities greater than 150 horsepower and models not more than five (5) years old."
>
> Sec. 2. The Inter-Agency Committee on Used Trucks and Engines (IAC-UTE) in the Department of Trade and Industry shall prescribe and promulgate, upon consultation with passenger and tourist bus operators, such guidelines as it may deem necessary to implement this Executive Order and Executive Order No. 354, including guidelines on the weight capacity, and age of the used trucks, used passenger/tourist buses, and used engines that are allowed for importation, in an exception to the CVDP Guidelines approved under Memorandum Order No. 157, Series of 1988: Provided, That in prescribing the said Guidelines, the Committee shall take into consideration not only the need to alleviate the said shortage but also the safety of the riding public/end users in particular and the public in general.
>
> Sec. 3. This Executive order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.
>
>
>
