# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 787

**DESIGNATING THE HEAD OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT-INTERNAL AUDIT OFFICE (OP-IAO) AS ADDITIONAL MEMBER OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ANTI-GRAFT COMMISSION (PAGC) CREATED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 12 SERIES OF 2001, AS AMENDED**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 787
- **Date**: March 27, 2009
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2009/eo_787_2009.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 787, March 27, 2009 ]
>
> DESIGNATING THE HEAD OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT-INTERNAL AUDIT OFFICE (OP-IAO) AS ADDITIONAL MEMBER OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ANTI-GRAFT COMMISSION (PAGC) CREATED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 12 SERIES OF 2001, AS AMENDED
>
> WHEREAS, the Presidential Anti-Graft Commission (PAGC) has been strengthened several times to reinforce the government's campaign against graft and corruption at all levels of the bureaucracy;
>
> **WHEREAS,** pursuant to the approved Rationalization Plan of the Office of the President Proper, the internal Audit Office (IAO) was primarily tasked, inter alia, to develop and implement anti-corruption and good governance measures; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to further strengthen the prevention and investigation of graft and corruption on the individual, system and organizational levels.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order that:
>
> **Section 1.** The Head of the Office of the President-internal Audit Office (OP-IAO) shall be an ex-officio member of the Presidential Anti-Graft Commission (PAGC).
>
> **Section 2.** All executive orders, rules, regulations, and other issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or otherwise modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 3.** This Executive Order shall fake effect immediately upon its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 27th day of March, 2009.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
