# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 845

**LIFTING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 839, SERIES OF 2009**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 845
- **Date**: November 15, 2009
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2009/eo_845_2009.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 845, November 15, 2009 ]
>
> LIFTING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 839, SERIES OF 2009
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 839 was issued by reason of the state of calamity brought about by a succession of typhoons that resulted in widespread devastation suffered by millions of Filipinos in Luzon;
>
> **WHEREAS,** in response to public clamor and to alleviate the plight of the affected victims of the typhoons that hit the country, the aforesaid Order directed oil industry players to maintain the prices of petroleum products prevailing on October 15, 2009 for the duration of the state of calamity in the entire Luzon;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the directive to oil industry players as provided in Section 1 of the aforesaid Order is predicated on the existence of an emergency and calamity in the entire Luzon and a limited/temporary duration;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the National Disaster Coordinating Council (NDCC) and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) have determined that, while the state of calamity subsists, the extreme emergency situation which served as the underlying reason for the issuance of Executive Order No. 839 no longer exists, although rehabilitation efforts continue to be undertaken in order to assist the victims of the calamity;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the DOE-DOJ Task Force, mandated under EO 839 and Republic Act No. 8479, has favorably recommended the lifting of EO 839 and the adoption of the proposal submitted by oil industry players led by Petron Corporation and Seaoil for a more targeted and focused calamity assistance program in selected areas in Benguet, Baguio City, Pangasinan, Eastern Laguna, Rizal, Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, Mountain Province, Isabela, Cainta, Marikina City, Malabon and Pasig City;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby lift the oil price freeze mandated under Executive Order No. 839, series of 2009. The Department of Energy (DOE) and the Department of Justice (DOJ) and their Joint Task Force are hereby directed to implement the package of proposals submitted by the oil industry players consistent with their respective rules and regulations.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila this 15 th day of November in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
