# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 804

**EXTENDING FURTHER THE DURATION OF OPERATION OF THE PRESIDENTIAL MIDDLE EAST PREPAREDNESS COMMITTEE (PMEPC) TO 30 JUNE 2009**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 804
- **Date**: May 26, 2009
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2009/eo_804_2009.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 804, May 26, 2009 ]
>
> EXTENDING FURTHER THE DURATION OF OPERATION OF THE PRESIDENTIAL MIDDLE EAST PREPAREDNESS COMMITTEE (PMEPC) TO 30 JUNE 2009
>
> I, GLORIAMACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order, that in view of the continuing need to undertake assessment and assist the embassies in the Middle East in updating their contingency plans due to the volatile political situations in the region, as well as to support the Department of Foreign Affairs in providing assistance to Filipino victims of kidnapping, hijacking, particularly in Somalia, or internal conflict, the extension of the duration of the operations of the Presidential Middle East Preparedness Committee (PMEPC) to 30 June 2009 or unless otherwise directed by the President.
>
> The Committee shall be provided with a funding allocation of Three Million Pesos (P3, 000,000.00) for its administrative and operational expenses to be taken from the President’s Contingency Fund. Additional financial requirements, if necessary, that may be needed by the Committee shall be sourced out by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) from available funds of concerned PMEPC member-agencies, subject to the usual government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.
>
> All other rules, regulations and issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> This Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of May, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.
>
> (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
