# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 296

**FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 219 DATED JANUARY 3, 1995 ESTABLISHING THE DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION LIBERALIZATION POLICY**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 296
- **Date**: March 10, 2004
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2004/eo_296_2004.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 296, March 10, 2004 ]
>
> FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 219 DATED JANUARY 3, 1995 ESTABLISHING THE DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION LIBERALIZATION POLICY
>
> WHEREAS, Official Philippine Carriers and the private sector in the tourism industry are major stockholders in Air Services Agreements and similar arrangements and thus should be allowed to participate in the negotiations of such Air Services Agreements as members of the single negotiations Panel created under Executive Order No. 219 dated January 3, 1995, as amended by Executive Order No. 32 dated August 22, 2001;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested I me by law, do hereby order paragraph 1.7 of EO No. 219 to be further amended to read as follows:
>
> > "1.7 Constituting a Single Negotiating Panel. To represent the Philippines in all negotiations leading to conclusion of Air Services Agreements or similar arrangements and succeeding negotiation or consultation talk regarding these Air Services Agreements or similar arrangements, a single Negotiating Panel is hereby constituted composed of representatives of the following government agencies: Department of Transportation and Communications - Chairman Department of Foreign Affair - Vice Chairman Department of Tourism - Member Department of Trade and Industry - Member Civil Aeronautics Board - Member Official Philippine Carriers - One(1) Member each Private Sector in the Tourism Industry - Two(2) Members to be recommended by the Secretary of Tourism And such, other person/s as may be authorized by the President."
>
> All executive orders, rules and regulations and other issuances inconsistent with the provision of this Executive Order are hereby revoked of modified accordingly.7!ᕼdMᗄ7 This executive Order shall take effect immediately. City of Manila, March 10, 2004
>
> (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
