# Executive Order No. 274

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 155 DATED DECEMBER 11, 2002 TO REVISE THE COMPOSITION OF THE ELEMENTS OF THE ANTI-SMUGGLING INTELLIGENCE AND INVESTIGATION CENTER (ASIIC)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 274
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2004/eo_274_2004.html)

---

> **MALACAÑANG**
> Manila
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
>
>
> **Executive Order No. 274             January 26, 2004**
>
> **AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 155 DATED DECEMBER 11, 2002 TO REVISE THE COMPOSITION OF THE ELEMENTS OF THE ANTI-SMUGGLING INTELLIGENCE AND INVESTIGATION CENTER (ASIIC)**
>
> **WHEREAS,** Executive Order No. 155, s. 2002 created the Anti-Smuggling Intelligence and Investigation Center (ASIIC) to investigate and interdict smuggling and other acts contrary to the Tariff and Customs Code of the Philippines committed on large scale or by criminal syndicates and for other purposes;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 3 of EO 155 provides that the center, be composed, among others, of the elements of the Presidential Security Group (PSG), and the Intelligence Service, Armed Forces of the Philippines (ISAFP);
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to provide the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) with the flexibility to utilize any appropriate unit to fully support the government’s anti-crime campaign.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 3 of EO 155, s. 2002, is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> "Sec. 3. Composition – The Center shall be composed of elements of the following
>
> 1. Armed Forces of the Philippines;
>
> 2. Bureau of Customs;
>
> 3. Philippine National Police;
>
> 4. Philippine Coast Guard; and
>
> 5. Department of Justice.
>
> **Section 2. Effectivity** - This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
>
>
> By the President:
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> *Executive Secretary*
>
>
>
