# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 300

**MODIFYING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CERTAIN ARTICLES UNDER SECTION 104 OF THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978 (PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1464), AS AMENDED**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 300
- **Date**: March 29, 2004
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2004/eo_300_2004.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 300, March 29, 2004 ]
>
> MODIFYING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CERTAIN ARTICLES UNDER SECTION 104 OF THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978 (PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1464), AS AMENDED
>
> WHEREAS, it is the policy of government to provide assistance to sectors facing economic difficulties;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the poultry and livestock sectors require assistance to bring down the costs of their inputs;
>
> **WHEREAS,** Section 401 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978 (Presidential Decree no. 1464), as amended, empowers the President of the Republic of the Philippines, increase, reduce, or remove existing rates of import duty, as well as to modify the form of duty and the tariff nomenclature under Section 104 of the Code;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** The articles specifically listed in Annex "A" hereof, as classified under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, shall be subject to the Most-Favoured-Nation (MFN) import duty for the period indicated in accordance with the schedule indicated opposite each article.
>
> **Section 2.** The nomenclature and the rates of import duty on tariff headings not enumerated and those listed but represented by the symbol "x x x" shall remain in force and in effect.
>
> **Section 3.** Upon the effectivity of this Executive Order, all articles listed in Annex "A" which are entered or withdrawn from warehouses in the Philippines for consumption shall be levied the MFD rates of duty therein prescribed.
>
> **Section 4.** All presidential issuances, administrative rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are contrary to or inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> **Section 5.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately following its complete publication in two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.
>
> Done, in the City Manila, this 29th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and four.
>
> (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **ALBERTO G. ROMULO**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
