# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 381

**PLACING THE BATAAN TECHNOLOGY PARK UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE SUBIC BAY METROPOLITAN AUTHORITY**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 381
- **Date**: October 26, 2004
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2004/eo_381_2004.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 381, October 26, 2004 ]
>
> PLACING THE BATAAN TECHNOLOGY PARK UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE SUBIC BAY METROPOLITAN AUTHORITY
>
> I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines,by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** *Jurisdiction.* The Bataan Technology Park (BTP) is hereby placed under the jurisdiction of the Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority (SBMA). All territories comprising the BTP shall henceforth be known as SBMA-Bataan:
>
> **Section 2.** *Economic Zone and Freeport.* SBMA-Bataan shall follow all the rules of SBMA as an Economic Zone and Freeport.
>
> **Section 3.** *Regulatory Powers, Functions and Authority.* The regulatory powers, functions and authority over BTP, henceforth known as SBMA-Bataan, are hereby transferred from the Bases Conversion Development Authority to the SBMA
>
> **Section 4.** *Management Structure.* BTP, henceforth known as SBMA-Bataan, shall continue to be managed in accordance with the charter of Bataan Technology park, Incorporated.1a⍵⍴h!1 Its Chairman, Board, and President/Chief Executive Officer shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines. The Board is empowered to reorganize the management staff of SBMA-Bataan.
>
> **Section 5.** *Repealing Clause.* All executive issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or any part thereof, which are inconsistent with any provision of this Executive Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of October, in the year of our Lord, two thousand and four.
>
> (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
