# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 385

**CREATING THE TASK FORCE ON ANTI-SMUGGLING**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 385
- **Date**: November 16, 2004
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2004/eo_385_2004.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 385, November 16, 2004 ]
>
> CREATING THE TASK FORCE ON ANTI-SMUGGLING
>
> WHEREAS, smuggling and other acts contrary to customs law committed on a large scale or by criminal syndicates continue to pose a direct and serious threats to national economy;
>
> **WHEREAS,** a comprehensive approach involving the different departments and agencies of government is necessary in order to eradicate this threat;
>
> **WHEREAS,** under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to recognize the administrative structure of the Executive department;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me under the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** *Creating a Task Force on Anti-Smuggling.* There is hereby created a Task Force on Anti-Smuggling to combat large scale smuggling. Executive Order No. 297 dated March 10, 2004 entitled Crating the Office of the Anti-Smuggling Presidential Adviser is hereby reactivated in its entirely subject to the following amendments, to wit:
>
> a. The Office of the Anti-Smuggling Presidential Adviser under the Office of the President is hereby abolished.1a⍵⍴h!1 Its functions are hereby transferred to a Task Force on Anti-Smuggling with the Secretary of Interior and Local Government as Task Force Head and composed of personnel to be selected by the said Task Force Head.
>
> b. The Task Force shall interface with the Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority (SBMA) Director of Anti-Smuggling on matters under the territorial jurisdiction of the SBMA
>
> **Section 2.** *Funding.* Funds of the operation of the Presidential Task Force shall be sourced from such funding sources as may be recommended by the Department of Budget and Management.
>
> **Section 3.** *Repealing Clause.* All executive issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. Upon the effectivity of this Executive Order, the abovementioned articles, which are entered and withdrawn from warehouses in the Philippines shall be levied the rates of duly herein prescribed.
>
> City of Manila NOV. 16, 2004
>
> (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
