# Executive Order No. 339

**DIRECTING DEPARTMENT SECRETARIES, UNDERSECRETARIES, ASSISTANT SECRETARIES, AND OTHER GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS OF EQUIVALENT RANK IN THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT TO LIMIT THEIR OFFICIAL TRAVELS ABROAD TO THOSE WHICH ARE URGENT AND NECESSARY**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 339
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1988/eo_339_1988.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 339 October 3, 1988**
>
> DIRECTING DEPARTMENT SECRETARIES, UNDERSECRETARIES, ASSISTANT SECRETARIES, AND OTHER GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS OF EQUIVALENT RANK IN THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT TO LIMIT THEIR OFFICIAL TRAVELS ABROAD TO THOSE WHICH ARE URGENT AND NECESSARY
>
> WHEREAS, department secretaries, undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank in the Executive Department should be on hand to efficiently and effectively manage their respective offices and be available to respond immediately and decisively to matters that require their attention;
>
> WHEREAS, it has been the policy of the Government to observe restraint in the utilization of its resources, and expenditure for official travel abroad is one item of expense that can take further restraint;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby direct all department secretaries, undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank in the Executive Department, to limit their travels abroad to those that are urgent and absolutely necessary, as provided under Executive Order No. 559, dated September 12, 1979.
>
> Proposed official travel abroad of the officials concerned shall be submitted to the Office of the President for decision of least ten (10) days before the scheduled departure.
>
> Invitations from foreign governments or international agencies organizations shall first be forwarded to the Office of the President for evaluation prior to being accepted.
>
> All executive orders and similar issuances that are in conflict or inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.
>
> This Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.
>
>
>
