# Executive Order No. 187

**DECLARING THE DELINEATING THE JOSE PANGANIBAN PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 187
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1994/eo_187_1994.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 187 July 13, 1994**
>
> DECLARING THE DELINEATING THE JOSE PANGANIBAN PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY
>
> WHEREAS, the Port of Jose Panganiban is one of the major and busiest ports in the country;
>
> WHEREAS, there is a need to expand the Port of Jose Panganiban for planning purposes to accommodate projected increases in port traffic and to program the development of the necessary port facilities to support the demands of the shipping trade within the region;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Jose Panganiban is hereby expanded and particularly described as follows:
>
> "Beginning at point marked 1 on the plan, thence to point 2 at a distance of 1,150.50m with bearing S60 00' W, thence to point 3 at a distance of 392.08m with bearing N29 07' W, thence to point 4 at a distance of 1,135.00m with bearing N60 00' E, thence to point 5 at a distance of 247.81m with bearing S29 45' E, thence to point 6 at a distance of 10.58m with bearing S34 10' E, thence to point 1 the point of beginning at a distance of 134.02m with bearing S34 10' E, all in all comprising a total area of 446,609.18 sq. m. more or less.
>
> Sec. 2. The Jose Panganiban Port Zone, as expanded, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the Philippine Ports Authority, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the Government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development, and utilization of the port.
>
> Sec. 3. All other orders, proclamations, and issuances or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> Sec. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.
>
>
>
