# Executive Order No. 210

**AMENDING SECTION 6 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 152, DATED JANUARY 21, 1994**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 210
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1994/eo_210_1994.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 210 October 27, 1994**
>
> AMENDING SECTION 6 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 152, DATED JANUARY 21, 1994
>
> WHEREAS, there is a need to effectively implement and coordinate the National Program for Unification and Development (NPUD) at the regional, provincial, city, and municipal levels through the establishment of corresponding regional and local councils;
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 152, series of 1994, authorized the NPUD Council to establish in every region a Regional Program for Unification and Development Council (RPUDC), as well as corresponding councils at the provincial, city, and municipal levels;
>
> WHEREAS, the Chairman of the Development Council and the POC are one and the same person who is either the provincial governor or the mayor, thus, creating a two-man Council;
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Section 6 of Executive Order No. 152, series of 1994, to read as follows:
>
> "Sec. 6. Program Implementation and Coordination at the Provincial, City and Municipal Levels. - The National Program for Unification and Development Council shall further establish corresponding councils at the provincial, city, and municipal levels to be composed of the Governor/Mayor and the PNP Director/Station Commander who, in turn, shall together select one (1) representative from the private sector, in consultation with Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, as the third member. Among themselves, they shall also elect a Chairman."
>
> This Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.
>
>
>
