# Executive Order No. 209

**ADJUSTMENT OF DIVIDEND RATE OF SELECTED GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND-CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS ON THEIR 1993 EARNINGS PURSUANT TO SECTION 5 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7656**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 209
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1994/eo_209_1994.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 209 October 24, 1994**
>
> ADJUSTMENT OF DIVIDEND RATE OF SELECTED GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND-CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS ON THEIR 1993 EARNINGS PURSUANT TO SECTION 5 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7656
>
> WHEREAS, Section 1 of Republic Act No 7656 provides that:
>
> "Sec. 1. Declaration of Policy. - It is hereby declared the policy of the State that in order for the national government to realize additional revenues, government-owned or-controlled corporations, without impairing their viability and the purposes for which they have been established, shall share a substantial amount of their net earnings to the National Government."
>
> WHEREAS, to support the viability and mandate of the government-owned and -controlled corporations, the liquidity, retained earnings position and medium term plans and programs of these government-owned and-controlled corporations were considered in the determination of the reasonable dividend rates of such corporations on their 1993 net earnings;
>
> WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5 of RA 7656, the Secretary of Finance recommended the adjustment on the percentage of annual net earnings that shall be declared by various government-owned and controlled corporations in the interest of national economy and general welfare.
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> Sec. 1. The percentage of net earnings to be declared and remitted by the following government-owned and-controlled corporations as dividends to the National Government as provided for under Sec. 3 of Republic Act No. 7656 is adjusted from at least fifty percent (50%) to the rates specified therein:
>
> Manila International Airport Authority — ten percent
>
> Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System — twenty percent
>
> National Development Company — zero percent
>
> National Power Corporation — zero percent
>
> Natural Resource and Development Corporation — forty percent
>
> PHIVIDEC Industrial Authority — ten percent
>
> Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority — thirty percent
>
> Sec. 2. The adjusted dividend rates provided for under Section 1 are only applicable on 1993 net earnings of the concerned government-owned and -controlled corporations.
>
> Sec. 3. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and Ninety Four.
>
>
>
