# Executive Order No. 217

**AMENDING SECTION 1.2 (b) OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 203, DATED 27 SEPTEMBER 1994, CREATING THE OVERSIGHT AND EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES FOR THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS MAJOR SOCIAL REFORM AGENDA**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 217
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1994/eo_217_1994.html)

---

> **EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 217 December 20, 1994**
>
> AMENDING SECTION 1.2 (b) OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 203, DATED 27 SEPTEMBER 1994, "CREATING THE OVERSIGHT
> AND EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES FOR THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT'S MAJOR SOCIAL REFORM AGENDA"
>
> WHEREAS, the implementation of the Social Reform Agenda (SRA) requires the full participation of the Basic Sectors and other non-government sectors, in consonance with the principles thereof in pursuit of people empowerment, through the adequate representation of these sectors in the Social Reform Council as the executive body of the SRA;
>
> WHEREAS, in the Social Reform Summit which was held on 27 September 1994, the government and the Basic Sectors agreed to forge a partnership to pursue social reform, and under which the government has agreed to expand the participation and representation of the Basic Sectors in the Social Reform Council; and,
>
> WHEREAS, to ensure wider and adequate representation of the Basic, Labor and Business Sectors, and the non-government organizations (NGOs), there is a need to further define and clarify Section 1.2 b of Executive Order No. 203, Series of 1994.
>
> NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Section 1.2 b of Executive Order No. 203, Series of 1994, which specifically designates the composition of the Social Reform Council, to read as follows:
>
> "b.9 Non-government Representatives Ten (10) from the Basic Sectors One (1) per sector One (1) from the (organized) Labor Sector; One (1) from the Business Sector; One (1) from the Non-Government Organizations (NGOs)"
>
> In addition, the following provision is hereby included:
>
> "c. Nomination Process for Non-government Representatives. The President shall appoint sectoral representatives from a list of nominees to be endorsed by the Lead Convenor. To set in motion the nomination process for the Basic Sectors, each Flagship Champion shall convene the sectoral organizations which participated in the Social Reform Summit. These sectoral organizations shall agree on and implement a nomination process and submit a maximum of three (3) nominees for endorsement by the Flagship Champion concerned to the Lead Convenor.
>
> For the Business, Formal Labor and Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), a similar process shall be followed in which the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) and the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP) shall function as their convening/endorsing agencies, respectively."
>
> This Executive Order takes effect immediately. lawphi1.net
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 20th day of December, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.
>
>
>
