# Republic Act No. 10888

**An Act Renewing for Another Twenty-Five (25) Years the Franchise Granted to Zoe Broadcasting, Inc., Amending for the Purpose Republic Act No. 7297, Entitled "An Act Granting the Zoe Broadcasting Network, Inc. a Franchise to Construct, Install, Operate and Maintain Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations Throughout the Philippines, and for Other Purposes", as Amended by Republic Act No. 7968**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10888
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2016/ra_10888_2016.html)

---

> Sixteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10888**
>
> **An Act Renewing for Another Twenty-Five (25) Years the Franchise Granted to Zoe Broadcasting, Inc., Amending for the Purpose Republic Act No. 7297, Entitled "An Act Granting the Zoe Broadcasting Network, Inc. a Franchise to Construct, Install, Operate and Maintain Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations Throughout the Philippines, and for Other Purposes", as Amended by Republic Act No. 7968**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** *Renewal of Franchise.* - Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the immediately succeeding section and applicable laws, rules and regulations, the franchise granted under Republic Act No. 7297, entitled "An Act Granting the ZOE Broadcasting Network, Inc. a Franchise to Construct, Install, Operate and Maintain Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations Throughout the Philippines, and for Other Purposes", as amended by Republic Act No. 7968, to ZOE Broadcasting Network, Inc., hereunder referred to as the grantee, its successors or assignees, is hereby renewed for another twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of this Act.
>
> **Section 2.** Section 1 of Republic Act No. 7297, as amended by Republic Act No. 7968, is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 1. *Nature and Scope of Franchise.* - Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby granted to the ZOE Broadcasting Network, Inc., its successors or assignees, hereunder referred to as the grantee, a franchise to construct, install, operate, and maintain, for commercial purposes and in the public interest, radio and television broadcasting stations throughout the Philippines, where frequencies and/or channels are still available for radio and/or television broadcasting, including digital terrestrial television system, through microwave, satellite, or whatever means, or the use of any technologies in television and radio systems, with the corresponding technological auxiliaries or facilities, special broadcast, and other program and distribution services, and relay stations, and to install radio communication facilities for the grantee’s private use in its broadcast services."
>
> **Section 3.** *Dispersal of Ownership.* - In accordance with the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least thirty percent (30%) or a higher percentage that may hereafter be provided by law of its outstanding capital stock in any securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years from the commencement of its operations; *Provided,* That in cases where public offer of shares is not applicable, establishment of cooperatives and other methods of encouraging public participation by citizens and corporations operating public utilities must be implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked.
>
> **Section 4.** Section 8 of Republic Act No. 7297 on tax provisions is hereby repealed.
>
> **Section 5.** *Adoption of Provisions Not Inconsistent with this Act.* - All other provisions of Republic Act No. 7297, as amended by Republic Act No. 7968, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, shall continue to be in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 6.** *Separability Clause.* - If any of the sections or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 7.** *Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause.* - This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so requires and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided for.
>
> **Section 8.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days from the date of its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.
>
> Approved,
>
> **FRANKLIN M. DRILON**
> President of the Senate
>
> **FELICIANO BELMONTE, JR.**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 9, 2015 and May 23, 2016, respectively.
>
> **OSCAR G. YABES**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: July 17, 2016
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO, III**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
