# Republic Act No. 10552

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE STA. ELENA – CAPALONGA BYPASS COASTAL ROAD IN THE PROVINCE OF CAMARINES NORTE INTO A NATIONAL ROAD AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10552
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2013/ra_10552_2013.html)

---

> Fifteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand twelve.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10552**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE STA. ELENA – CAPALONGA BYPASS COASTAL ROAD IN THE PROVINCE OF CAMARINES NORTE INTO A NATIONAL ROAD AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Sta. Elena – Capalonga Bypass Coastal Road in the Province of Camarines Norte is hereby converted into a national road under the supervision of the Department of Public Works and Highways.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Public Works and Highways shall include in the Department’s program the improvement, repair and maintenance of the said road, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 3, 2011 and January 30, 2013, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: MAY 15 2013
>
> **(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
