# Republic Act No. 10684

**AN ACT CREATING AN ADDITIONAL LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT IN THE PROVINCE OF CEBU TO BE KNOWN AS THE SEVENTH LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10684
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2015/ra_10684_2015.html)

---

> Sixteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10684**
>
> AN ACT CREATING AN ADDITIONAL LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT IN THE PROVINCE OF CEBU TO BE KNOWN AS THE SEVENTH LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** *Creation of the Seventh Legislative District.* – There is hereby created an additional legislative district in the Province of Cebu to be known as the Seventh Legislative District by reapportioning the current Second Legislative District to commence in the next national and local elections after the effectivity of this Act. Henceforth, the following municipalities shall comprise the Seventh Legislative District, to wit:
>
> (a) Dumanjug;
>
> (b) Ronda;
>
> (c) Alcantara;
>
> (d) Moalboal;
>
> (e) Badian;
>
> (f) Alegria;
>
> (g) Malabuyoc; and
>
> (h) Ginatilan.
>
> The current Second Legislative District of the Province of Cebu, which shall continue to be designated as such, shall be composed of the following municipalities, to wit:
>
> (a) Argao;
>
> (b) Dalaguete;
>
> (c) Alcoy;
>
> (d) Boljoon;
>
> (e) Oslob;
>
> (f) Santander; and
>
> (g) Samboan.
>
> **SECTION 2.** *Rules and Regulations.* — The Commission on Elections shall issue the necessary rules and regulations within thirty (30) days upon approval of this Act.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Repealing Clause.* — All laws, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.1âwphi1
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Effectivity.* — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in any newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on May 26, 2014, amended by the Senate on July 28, 2015, and which amendment was concurred in by the House of Representatives on August 10, 2015.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: SEP 18 2015
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
