# Republic Act No. 10743

**AN ACT DECLARING THE FIFTH DAY OF OCTOBER OF EVERY YEAR AS THE NATIONAL TEACHERS’ DAY**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10743
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2016/ra_10743_2016.html)

---

> Sixteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10743**
>
> AN ACT DECLARING THE FIFTH DAY OF OCTOBER OF EVERY YEAR AS THE NATIONAL TEACHERS’ DAY
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** *National Teachers’ Day.* – The fifth day of October of every year is hereby declared as the “National Teachers’ Day”.
>
> To ensure a meaningful observance of this special working holiday, all heads of government agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned and -controlled corporations especially those that are directly dealing with the teachers, including local government units, and employers in the private sector, shall encourage and afford sufficient time and opportunities for their employees to engage and participate in any activity conducted within the premises of their offices or establishments in celebration of the “National Teachers’ Day”.
>
> **SECTION 2.** *Lead Agency.* – Pursuant to the observance of the National Teachers’ Day, the annual program of activities shall be prepared and implemented with the Department of Education as the lead agency.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Effectivity.* – This Act shall take effect fifteen 15 days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation, whichever comes earlier.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of the Senate |
>
> Senate Bill No. 510, which was approved by the Senate on May 18, 2015, was adopted by the House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill No. 4148 on November 25, 2015.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary GeneralHouse of Representatives | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of the Senate |
>
> Approved: JAN 29 2016
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO, III**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
