# Republic Act No. 10664

**AN ACT DECLARING THE LAST FULL WEEK OF AUGUST ASARMED FORCES OF THE FILIPINO PEOPLE WEEK**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10664
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2015/ra_10664_2015.html)

---

> **Sixteenth Congress
> Second Regular Session**
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand fourteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10664**
>
> AN ACT DECLARING THE LAST FULL WEEK OF AUGUST ASARMED FORCES OF THE FILIPINO PEOPLE WEEK
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** *Short Title,* - This Act shall be known as the "Armed Forces of the Filipino People Week".
>
> **Section 2.** *Armed Forces of the Filipino People Week.* - To give due recognition to the important role and contributions of past and present Filipino military officers and personnel, the last full week of August is hereby declared the Armed Forces of the Filipino People Week.
>
> **Section 3.** *Lead Agency.* - The Department of National Defense (DND) shall urge all citizens to recognize an " Armed Forces of the Filipino People Week" and shall hold programs and activites in observance of the event.
>
> **Section 4.** *Implementing Rules and Regulations.* - The DND shall promulgate the appropriate rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of this Act within sixty (60) days from its approval.
>
> **Section 5.** *Effectivity.*- This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** *President of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on September 10, 2014 and May 4,2015, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: July 6, 2015
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
