# Republic Act No. 10988

**REPUBLIC ACTS**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10988
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_10988_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10988**
>
> AN ACT SEPARATING THE PARAÑAQUE NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL – SAN ANTONIO HIGH SCHOOL ANNEX IN BARANGAY SAN ANTONIO, PARAÑAQUE CITY, FROM THE PARAÑAQUE NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS SAN ANTONIO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL PARAÑAQUE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Parañaque National High School – San Antonio High School Annex in Barangay San Antonio, Parañaque City, is hereby separated from the Parañaque National High School and converted into an independent national high school to be known as San Antonio National High School Parañaque.
>
> **Section 2.** All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Parañaque National High School – San Antonio High School Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the San Antonio National High School Parañaque.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department’s program the operationalization of the San Antonio National High School Parañaque, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s appropriation of the Parañaque National High School – San Antonio High School Annex.1âwphi1 Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation of the school shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall formulate the rules and regulations implementing the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House
> of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 9, 2017 and December 11, 2017, respectively.
>
> **LUTGARDO B. BARBO**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: March 14, 2018
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
