# Republic Act No. 10965

**An Act Establishing a National Science High School in the City of Laoag, Province of Ilocos Norte to be Known as Rodolfo CG. Fariñas, Jr. National Science High School and Appropriating Funds Therefor**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10965
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2017/ra_10965_2017.html)

---

> **Seventeenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand seventeen.**
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10965**
>
> An Act Establishing a National Science High School in the City of Laoag, Province of Ilocos Norte to be Known as Rodolfo CG. Fariñas, Jr. National Science High School and Appropriating Funds Therefor
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** *Establishment of a National Science High School.* - There is hereby established, under the supervision of the Department of Education, a national science high school in the City of Laoag, Province of Ilocos Norte to be known as Rodolfo CG. Farinas, Jr. National Science High School.
>
> **Section 2.** *Appropriations.* - The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department’s program the operationalization of the Rodolfo CG. Farinas, Jr. National Science High School, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** *Implementation.* - The Secretary of Education shall formulate the rules and regulations implementing the provisions of this Act within one hundred twenty (120) days after its effectivity.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on August 9, 2017, amended by the Senate on December 11, 2017, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on December 12, 2017.
>
> **LUTGARDO BARBO**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: December 28, 2017
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
