# Republic Act No. 10852

**AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY STO. NIÑO, PARAÑAQUE CITY TO BE KNOWN AS STO. NINO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10852
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2016/ra_10852_2016.html)

---

> Sixteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10852**
>
> AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY STO. NIÑO, PARAÑAQUE CITY TO BE KNOWN AS STO. NINO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** There is hereby established, under the supervision of the Department of Education, a national high school in Barangay Sto. Niño, Parañaque City to be known as Sto. Niño National High School.
>
> **SECTION 2.** The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department’s program the operationalization of the Sto. Niño National High School, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **SECTION 3.** The Secretary of Education shall issue rules and regulations necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
>
> **SECTION 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 23, 2015 and February 2, 2016, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: MAY 23 2016
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
