# Republic Act No. 10910

**An Act Increasing the Prescriptive Period for Violations of Republic Act No. 3019, Otherwise Known as the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act, from Fifteen (15) Years to Twenty (20) Years, Amending Section 11 Thereof**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10910
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2016/ra_10910_2016.html)

---

> Sixteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10910**
>
> **An Act Increasing the Prescriptive Period for Violations of Republic Act No. 3019, Otherwise Known as the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act, from Fifteen (15) Years to Twenty (20) Years, Amending Section 11 Thereof**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section 11 of Republic Act No. 3019, as amended, otherwise known as the "Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act", is hereby further amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 11. *Prescription of Offenses.* - All offenses punishable under this Act shall prescribe in twenty years."
>
> **Section 2.** *Separability Clause.* - Should any provision of this Act be declared invalid, the remaining provisions shall continue to be valid and subsisting.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 3.** *Repealing Clause.* - All laws, executive orders, or administrative orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby amended, repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **FRANKLIN M. DRILON**
> President of the Senate
>
> **FELICIANO BELMONTE, JR.**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> **OSCAR G. YABES**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: July 21, 2016
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO, III**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
