# Republic Act No. 10769

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE EXTENSION OFFICE OF THE LAND TRANSPORTATION OFFICE (LTO) LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. MARIA, PROVINCE OF BULACAN INTO A REGULAR LTO DISTRICT OFFICE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10769
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2016/ra_10769_2016.html)

---

> Sixteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10769**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE EXTENSION OFFICE OF THE LAND TRANSPORTATION OFFICE (LTO) LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. MARIA, PROVINCE OF BULACAN INTO A REGULAR LTO DISTRICT OFFICE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **SECTION 1.** The existing Land Transportation Office (LTO) Extension Office located in the Municipality of Sta. Maria, Province of Bulacan is hereby converted into a regular LTO district office.
>
> **SECTION 2.** The Secretary of Transportation and Communications shall immediately include in the Department’s programs the operationalization of the Regular LTO District Office in the Municipality of Sta. Maria, Province of Bulacan, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s appropriations of the Sta. Maria LTO Extension Office. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued operation of the Regular LTO District Office shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **SECTION 3.** All laws, rules and regulations inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on May 12, 2014, amended by the Senate on January 19, 2016, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on January 27, 2016.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary GeneralHouse of Representatives |
>
> Approved: APR 26 2016
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO, III**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
