# Republic Act No. 10534

**AN ACT NAMING THE MOUNTAIN PROVINCE POLICE PROVINCIAL OFFICE IN THE CAPITAL TOWN OF BONTOC, MOUNTAIN PROVINCE TO CAMP LT. GERONIMO F. MONTES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10534
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2013/ra_10534_2013.html)

---

> Fifteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand twelve.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10534**
>
> AN ACT NAMING THE MOUNTAIN PROVINCE POLICE PROVINCIAL OFFICE IN THE CAPITAL TOWN OF BONTOC, MOUNTAIN PROVINCE TO CAMP LT. GERONIMO F. MONTES
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Mountain Province Police Provincial Office in the Capital Town of Bontoc, Mountain Province is hereby named Camp Lt. Geronimo F. Montes.
>
> **Section 2.** The Philippine National Police (PNP) shall issue the necessary rules, orders and circulars to implement the provision of this Act.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect immediately upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on June 4, 2012 and February 4, 2013, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EDWIN B. BELLEN** Acting Senate Secretary | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: MAY 15 2013
>
> **(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
