# Republic Act No. 10908

**An Act Mandating the Integration of Filipino-Muslim and Indigenous Peoples History, Culture and Identity in the Study of Philippine History in Both Basic and Higher Education**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10908
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2016/ra_10908_2016.html)

---

> Sixteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10908**
>
> **An Act Mandating the Integration of Filipino-Muslim and Indigenous Peoples History, Culture and Identity in the Study of Philippine History in Both Basic and Higher Education**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** *Short Title.* - This Act shall be known as the "Integrated History Act of 2016".
>
> **Section 2.** *Integration of Filipino-Muslim and Indigenous Peoples History, Culture and Identity Studies in Philippine History.* - With the ultimate objective of creating an inclusive history that accounts for all Filipinos, there is a need to integrate the history, culture and identity studies of Filipino-Muslims and Indigenous People in the grand narrative of Philippine history.
>
> **Section 3.** *Key Content.* - In the formulation of the curriculum for an inclusive and integrative study of Philippine history, including the writing, printing and publication of textbook and other reading materials relative thereto, the agencies concerned shall consult recognized experts on Filipino-Muslims and Indigenous Peoples history, culture and identity.
>
> **Section 4.** *Repealing Clause.* - Any provision of law or regulation inconsistent herewith is hereby repealed, revoked or modified accordingly.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 5.** *Separability Clause.* - If any provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional or inoperative, the other provisions shall remain in force and effect.
>
> **Section 6.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **FELICIANO BELMONTE, JR.**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> **FRANKLIN M. DRILON**
> President of the Senate
>
> Senate Bill No. 3205, which was approved by the Senate on May 23, 2016, was adopted as an amendment to House Bill No. 4832 by the House of Representatives on May 23, 2016.
>
> **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> **OSCAR G. YABES**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> Approved: July 21, 2016
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO, III**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
