# Republic Act No. 10652

**AN ACT APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF TWENTY-TWO BILLION FOUR HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVEN MILLION SIX HUNDRED EIGHT THOUSAND PESOS (P22,467,608,000) AS SUPPLEMENTAL APPROPRIATIONS FOR FY 2014 AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10652
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2014/ra_10652_2014.html)

---

> **Sixteenth Congress
> Second Regular Session**
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand fourteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10652**
>
> AN ACT APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF TWENTY-TWO BILLION FOUR HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVEN MILLION SIX HUNDRED EIGHT THOUSAND PESOS (P22,467,608,000) AS SUPPLEMENTAL APPROPRIATIONS FOR FY 2014 AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** *Appropriations. –* The sum of twenty-two billion four hundred sixty-seven million six hundred eight thousand pesos (P22,467,608,000) is hereby appropriated as supplemental appropriations for the FY 2014 Budget.
>
> **Section 2.** *Payment for the Implementation of Urgent Projects. –* The sum of twenty-two billion four hundred sixty-seven million six hundred eight thousand pesos (P22,467,608,000) is hereby appropriated to fund urgent and important projects which cannot be funded by savings or through the Unprogrammed Fund and are not funded under Republic Act No. 10633 or the FY 2014 General Appropriations Act (GAA). The government agencies or Government-Owned and -Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), projects or programs, and amounts covered are as follows:
>
> |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | Government Agency/GOCC/ Special Purpose Fund | | Project/Program | Amount |
> | 1. | Department of Finance – Bureau of the Treasury | Additional Capital Outlay and MOOE for the implementation of the Treasury Single Account | P803,380,000 |
> | 2. | Department of Finance – Bureau of the Treasury | Budgetary Shortfall for Transaction Fees and Charges as a Result of the Implementation of the Treasury Single Account | 100,407,000 |
> | 3. | Department of Environment and Natural Resources – Office of the Secretary | Payment for the Actual Services Rendered by the 294 Hired Bantay Gubat | 11,176,000 |
> | 4. | Department of Finance – Office of the Secretary | Phase 2 of the Renovation of DOF – OSEC Property | 32,224,000 |
> | 5. | Department of the Interior and Local Government – Bureau of Fire Protection | Transition Investment Support Plan – ARMM Procurement of 33 Firetrucks | 199,167,000 |
> | 6. | Department of the Interior and Local Government – Philippine National Police | Operational Transformation Plan for the Philippine National Police | 2,833,282,000 |
> | 7. | Department of Justice – Office of the Secretary | Transfer of Quezon City Prosecutors and Public Attorney’s Offices, Including the Provision for Electrical Connection, Water Connection, PABX Telephone Rack Installation and Structured Cabling | 10,500,000 |
> | 8. | Department of Science and Technology – Information and Communications Technology Office | Acquisition of 15,000 Units of Personal Computers | 300,000,000 |
> | 9. | Department of Public Works and Highways – Office of the Secretary | Obligations Arising from Implemented Infrastructure Projects | 1,902,743,000 |
> | 10. | Department of Public Works and Highways – Office of the Secretary | Completion of Development Assistance to the Province of Quezon | 240,000,000 |
> | 11. | Department of Public Works and Highways – Office of the Secretary | Construction of the New Bohol Provincial Capitol to Replace Condemned Building | 350,000,000 |
> | 12. | Department of Public Works and Highways – Office of the Secretary | Retrofitting of the Presidential Management Staff Office Building | 210,000,000 |
> | 13. | Department of Social Welfare and Development – Office of the Secretary | Updating of the National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-PR) | 1,942,521,000 |
> | 14. | Department of Social Welfare and Development – Office of the Secretary | Emergency Shelter Assistance for Victims of Typhoon Yolanda | 2,084,480,000 |
> | 15. | Department of Transportation and Communications – Office of the Secretary | Metro Rail Transit 3 Rehabilitation and Capacity Extension, Including Total Replacement of the Existing Signaling System and Rehabilitation of Escalators and Elevators | 1,207,163,000 |
> | 16. | House of Representatives | Completion of the Legislative Library and Archives Building/Congressional E-Library | 250,000,000 |
> | 17. | House of Representatives | Expenses of the Ad-Hoc Committee on Bangsamoro Basic Law and Printing of the 2015 General Appropriations Bill | 70,169,000 |
> | 18. | Department of Transportation and Communications – Light Rail Transit Authority | Rehabilitation of Light Rail Transit Line 1 and Line 2 | 727,690,000 |
> | 19. | Department of Transportation and Communications – Mactan-Cebu International Airport Authority | Construction of Mactan-Cebu International Airport Presidential and Dignitaries (PAD) Lounge Building | 118,559,000 |
> | 20. | Department of Environment and Natural Resources – Environmental Management Bureau | Remediation of the San Mateo Sanitary Landfill | 178,005,000 |
> | 21. | National Electrification Administration | Installation of 10-Megavolt Amperes Substation in Sto. Domingo, Albay | 32,552,000 |
> | 22. | National Housing Authority | Construction of 27,313 Units of Permanent Housing for Victims of Typhoon Yolanda | 7,999,978,000 |
> | 23. | National Housing Authority | Implementation of the North Triangle Relocation Project |1âwphi1 286,702,000 |
> | 24. | Philippine Coconut Authority | Coconut Scale Insect Emergency Action Plan | 340,345,000 |
> | 25. | Philippine Fisheries Development Authority | Construction of Fishport, Lighthouses and Seawalls | 196,385,000 |
> | 26. | Philippine Institute for Development Studies | Provision for Rent of Office Space During Pendency of Construction of PIDS’ New Building | 40,180,000 |
> |  | | Total | P22,467,608,000 |
>
> **Section 3.** *Use and Release of Funds.* – The amount appropriated shall be released by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) to the implementing agencies in accordance with budgeting, accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations: *Provided,* That the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) shall develop a uniform formula or parameter for the fair and equitable distribution of the Emergency Shelter Assistance Fund for the victims of Typhoon Yolanda.
>
> **Section 4.** *Applicability of General and Special Provisions in the FY 2014 General Appropriations Act. –* The amounts herein appropriated shall be used for the purposes indicated and subject to the relevant special and general provisions under Republic Act No. 10633 or the FY 2014 GAA.
>
> **Section 5.** *Availability of Appropriations. –* The appropriations authorized in this Act shall be available for release and obligation for the purposes specified for one (1) year from the date of the effectivity of this Act.
>
> **Section 6.** *Transparency Provisions. –* The concerned implementing agencies shall ensure that the details of projects, such as the name of contractors or suppliers and corresponding amount paid, are included as part of the information posted on their transparency seals required under Section 91 of the General Provisions under Republic Act No. 10633 or the FY 2014 GAA.
>
> **Section 7.** *Separability Clause. –* If, for any reason or reasons, any part or provision of this Act shall be declared as unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 8.** *Effectivity. –* This Act shall take effect immediately upon its publication.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** *Speaker of the House House of Representatives* |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 17, 2014.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.)  **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved:
>
> DEC 23 2014
>
> **(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
