# Republic Act No. 10516

**AN ACT EXPANDING THE UTILIZATION OF THE INDUSTRIAL ESTATE IN LAMAO, LIMAY, BATAAN FOR BUSINESSES ENGAGED IN ENERGY AND ENERGY-RELATED INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS AND OTHER GAINFUL ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES IN ADDITION TO PETROCHEMICAL AND RELATED INDUSTRIES, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 949**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10516
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2013/ra_10516_2013.html)

---

> Fifteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand twelve.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10516**
>
> AN ACT EXPANDING THE UTILIZATION OF THE INDUSTRIAL ESTATE IN LAMAO, LIMAY, BATAAN FOR BUSINESSES ENGAGED IN ENERGY AND ENERGY-RELATED INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS AND OTHER GAINFUL ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES IN ADDITION TO PETROCHEMICAL AND RELATED INDUSTRIES, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 949
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 949, entitled "Vesting The Administration And Ownership In Favor Of The Philippine National Oil Company Of That Parcel Of Land Of The Public Domain Located At Lamao, Limay, Bataan Which Was Reserved For Industrial Estate Purposes Pursuant To Proclamation No. 361 Dated March 6, 1968 As Amended By Proclamation No. 630 Dated November 29, 1969 And For Other Purposes", is hereby further amended to read as follows:
>
> "SECTION 1. *Assignment of Duty.* – The administration, management, and ownership of that parcel of land of the public domain located at Lamao, Limay, Bataan which is reserved for industrial estate purposes and more particularly described in Presidential Proclamation No. 361 dated March 6, 1968 as amended by Proclamation No. 630 dated November 29, 1969, subject to private rights, if any, which shall be the subject of expropriation, is hereby transferred to the Philippine National Oil Company (PNOC) in full and absolute ownership for the nominal sum of One Peso: *Provided,* That, all locators, lessees and sub-lessees, now operating therein shall be allowed to continue with its usual business operations, transactions and activities as authorized by law subject to such rules and regulations as PNOC may prescribe. The Bureau of Lands shall survey and fix the permanent boundaries of the aforementioned parcel of land of the public domain."
>
> **Section 2.** Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 949 is hereby further amended to read as follows:
>
> "SECTION 2. *Purpose of Land Use.* – The PNOC shall manage, operate and develop the said parcel of land as an industrial zone and will establish, develop and operate or cause the establishment, development and operation thereat of petrochemical and related industries, as well as of businesses engaged in energy and energy-allied activities or energy-related infrastructure projects, or of such other business activities that will promote its best economic use, as determined by the PNOC Board of Directors, by itself or its subsidiaries or by any other entity or person it may deem competent alone or in joint venture: *Provided,* That, where any petrochemical or energy-related industry or any such other business as determined by the PNOC is operated by private entities or persons, whether or not in joint venture with the PNOC or its subsidiaries, the PNOC may lease, sell and/or convey such portions of the industrial zone to such private entities or persons."
>
> **Section 3.** *Implementing Rules and Regulations.* – Within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Department of Energy (DOE) and the PNOC shall prescribe such rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of this Act.
>
> **Section 4.** *Separability Clause.* – Should any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or provision of this Act be held unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** *Repealing Clause.* – All other laws, decrees, orders or regulations or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 6.** *Effectivity.* – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 4, 2013 and February 6, 2013, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: APR 17 2013
>
> **(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
