# Republic Act No. 10998

**REPUBLIC ACTS**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10998
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_10998_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10998**
>
> AN ACT SEPARATING THE CONNER CENTRAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL – GUINA-ANG ANNEX IN BARANGAY GUINA-ANG, MUNICIPALITY OF CONNER, PROVINCE OF APAYAO FROM THE CONNER CENTRAL NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS GUINA-ANG NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Conner Central National High School – Guina-ang Annex in Barangay Guina-ang, Municipality of Conner, Province of Apayao is hereby separated from the Conner Central National High School and converted into an independent national high school to be known as Guina-ang national High School.
>
> **Section 2.** All personnel, assets, liabilities, and records of the Conner Central National High School – Guina-ang Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Guina-ang National High School.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department’s program the operationalization of the Guina-ang National High School, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s appropriation of the Conner Central National High School – Guina-ang Annex. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation of the school shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of Education shall formulate the rules and regulations necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act within one hundred twenty (120) days after its effectivity.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> Approved,
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House
> of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 14, 2017 and December 11, 2017, respectively.
>
> **LUTGARDO B. BARBO**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: March 21, 2018
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
