# Republic Act No. 10914

**An Act Granting Philippine Citizenship to Hans-Peter Smit**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10914
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2016/ra_10914_2016.html)

---

> Sixteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10914**
>
> **An Act Granting Philippine Citizenship to Hans-Peter Smit**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Mr. Hans-Peter Smit is hereby granted Philippine citizenship with all the rights, privileges and prerogatives, as well as the duties and obligations appurtenant thereto under the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of the Philippines.
>
> **Section 2.** After the taking by Mr. Hans-Peter Smit of his Oath of Allegiance before an officer duly authorized for this purpose, and the registration of the same with the Bureau of Immigration, Mr. Hans-Peter Smit shall enter upon the full enjoyment of his Philippine citizenship.
>
> **Section 3**. Upon registration of the Oath of Allegiance, the Bureau of Immigration shall forthwith issue Mr. Hans-Peter Smit’s Certificate of Naturalization.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect immediately upon its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **FRANKLIN M. DRILON**
> President of the Senate
>
> **FELICIANO BELMONTE, JR.**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 23, 2016 and June 6, 2016, respectively.
>
> **OSCAR G. YABES**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: July 21, 2016
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO, III**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
