# Republic Act No. 10947

**An Act Establishing a Multi-Species Marine Hatchery in the Municipality of Plaridel, Province of Quezon and Appropriating Funds Therefor**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10947
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2017/ra_10947_2017.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> First Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, two thousand sixteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10947**
>
> An Act Establishing a Multi-Species Marine Hatchery in the Municipality of Plaridel, Province of Quezon and Appropriating Funds Therefor
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established, under the supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a multi-species marine hatchery in the Municipality of Plaridel, Province of Quezon.
>
> **Section 2.** The BFAR-DA shall, within two (2) years after the construction of the multi-species marine hatchery, transfer the management of the same to the local government unit concerned through a memorandum of agreement.1a\^/phi1 It shall implement a training and phasing-in program for local government personnel on the management and operation of the hatchery.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the Department’s programs the establishment of the multi-species marine hatchery in the Municipality of Plaridel, Province of Quezon, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act. The local government unit concerned shall set aside funds from any available local revenue in an amount deemed appropriate for the operationalization of the hatchery.
>
> **Section 4.** Within sixty (60) days from the passage of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the rules and regulations on the supervision, monitoring, transfer, or withdrawal by the BFAR of the multi-species marine hatchery.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on March 13, 2017 and May 30, 2017, respectively.
>
> **LUTGARDO BARBO**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: August 23, 2017
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
