# Republic Act No. 10669

**AN ACT DECLARING AUGUST 18 OF EVERY YEAR AS "JESSE ROBREDO DAY", A SPECIAL WORKING HOLIDAY, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 10669
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2015/ra_10669_2015.html)

---

> **Sixteenth Congress
> Second Regular Session**
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand fourteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 10669**
>
> AN ACT DECLARING AUGUST 18 OF EVERY YEAR AS "JESSE ROBREDO DAY", A SPECIAL WORKING HOLIDAY, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled.*
>
> **Section 1.** *Title.* – This Act shall be known as ***"Jesse Robredo Day"***.
>
> **Section 2.** *Special Working Holiday.* – August 18 of every year is hereby declared as "Jesse Robredo Day", which shall be a special working holiday, to be celebrated in all elementary and secondary schools in the country. In the event that the holiday falls on a weekend, the holiday shall be observed on the Friday of that week.
>
> **Section 3.** *Implementing Agency.* – The Department of Education shall plan and implement activities for the "Jesse Robredo Day", and ensure that Jesse Robredo’s legacy of good governance and leadership is given emphasis to encourage students to continue the same for the good of the Philippines and the Filipino people.
>
> **Section 4.** *Separability Clause.* – If any provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity and effectivity of the other provisions hereof.
>
> **Section 5.** *Repealing Clause.* – All laws, decrees, orders and issuances or portions thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** *Effectivity.* – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its publication in at least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* | (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON** *President of the Senate* |
>
> Senate Bill No. 1281, which was approved by the Senate on June 9, 2014, was adopted as an amendment to House Bill No. 4768 by the House of Representatives on May 12, 2015.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives | (Sgd.) **OSCAR G. YABES** *Secretary of the Senate* |
>
> Approved: AUGUST 18, 2015
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
