# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 700

**IDENTIFYING THE SOCIAL SECURITY IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM AS THE CORE OF THE UNIFIED MULTI-PURPOSE IDENTIFICATION (ID) SYSTEM AND DIRECTING THE SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM TO IMPLEMENT THE STREAMLINING AND HARMONIZATION OF THE ID SYSTEMS OF ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 700
- **Date**: January 16, 2008
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2008/eo_700_2008.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 700, January 16, 2008 ]
>
> IDENTIFYING THE SOCIAL SECURITY IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM AS THE CORE OF THE UNIFIED MULTI-PURPOSE IDENTIFICATION (ID) SYSTEM AND DIRECTING THE SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM TO IMPLEMENT THE STREAMLINING AND HARMONIZATION OF THE ID SYSTEMS OF ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 420 dated April 26, 2005 required all government agencies and government-owned or and controlled corporations to streamline and harmonize their identification (ID) systems and authorized the Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) to implement the same;
>
> **WHEREAS,** some work has been done by the NEDA on the assignment;
>
> **WHEREAS,** there are twelve million cardholders of the Social Security System;
>
> **WHEREAS,** in other countries like the United States, the Social Security card is the most used ID system;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA M. ARROYO**, President of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** The Social Security card shall serve as the core of the unified multi-purpose identification (ID) system.1aшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** The Administrator, Social Security System (SSS) is hereby mandated to take over the work of the Director-General, National Economic Development Authority to implement the streamlining and harmonization of the ID systems of all government agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations towards a unified multi-purpose ID System.
>
> **Section 3.** The Administrator, SSS shall build on the work already done by the Director-General, NEDA.
>
> **Section 4.** The NEDA and the National Statistics Office as well as all other agencies identified by the SSS shall assist the SSS in developing the unified multi-purpose ID system.
>
> **Section 5.** The SSS shall use its funds to carry out the objectives of this Order.
>
> **Section 6.** All Executive Orders or issuances, or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 7.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of January in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand Eight.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
