# GR-169899

**Philacor Credit Corporation Vs. Commissioner of Internal Revenue**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: Philacor Credit Corporation Vs. Commissioner of Internal Revenue
- **Ponente**: Brion, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2013/feb2013/gr_169899_2013.html)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> **SUPREME COURT**
> Manila
>
> SECOND DIVISION
>
> **G.R. No. 169899               February 06, 2013**
>
> PHILACOR CREDIT CORPORATION, Petitioner,
>
> vs.
> **COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE,**  Respondent.
>
> D E C I S I O N
>
> **BRION, *J.:***
>
> Before us is a petition for review on certiorari1under Rule 45 of the Rules of Court seeking the reversal of the decision2 dated September 23, 2005 of the Court of Tax Appeals *(CTA) en bane* in C.T.A, E.B. No. 19 (C.T.A. Case No. 5674). In the assailed decision, the CTA *en banc* affirmed the CTA Division’s resolution3 of April 6, 2004. Both courts held that petitioner Philacor Credit Corporation *(Philacor),* as an assignee of promissory notes, is liable for deficiency documentary stamp tax *(DST)* on (1) the issuance of promissory notes; and (2) the assignment of promissory notes for the fiscal year ended 1993.
>
> The facts are not disputed.
>
> Philacor is a domestic corporation organized under Philippine laws and is engaged in the business of retail financing. Through retail financing, a prospective buyer of a home appliance – with neither cash nor any credit card – may purchase appliances on installment basis from an appliance dealer. After Philacor conducts a credit investigation and approves the buyer’s application, the buyer executes a unilateral promissory note in favor of the appliance dealer. The same promissory note is subsequently assigned by the appliance dealer to Philacor.4
>
> Pursuant to Letter of Authority No. 17107 dated July 6, 1974, Revenue Officer Celestino Mejia examined Philacor’s books of accounts and other accounting records for the fiscal year August 1, 1992 to July 31, 1993. Philacor received tentative computations of deficiency taxes for this year. Philacor’s Finance Manager, Leticia Pangan, contested the tentative computations of deficiency taxes (totaling P20,037,013.83) through a letter dated April 17, 1995.5
>
> On May 16, 1995, Mr. Mejia sent a letter to Philacor revising the preliminary assessments as follows:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | Deficiency Income Tax | P 9,832,098.22 |
> | Deficiency Percentage Tax | 866,287.60 |
> | Deficiency Documentary Stamp Tax | 3,368,169. 45 |
> | **Total** | ============== **P14,066,555.27**6 ============== |
>
> Philacor then received Pre-Assessment Notices (*PANs*), all dated July 18, 1996, covering the alleged deficiency income, percentage and DSTs, including increments.7
>
> On February 3, 1998, Philacor received demand letters and the corresponding assessment notices, all dated January 28, 1998. The assessments, inclusive of increments, cover the following:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | Deficiency Income Tax | P12, 888,085.09 |
> | Deficiency Percentage Tax | 1,185,977.07 |
> | Deficiency DST Tax | 3,368,196. 45 |
> | **Total** | ============== **P17,442,231.61**8 ============== |
