# Republic Act No. 5947

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE ILOCOS NORTE SCHOOL OF ARTS AND TRADE IN THE CITY OF LAOAG, INTO A TEACHER-TRAINING INSTITUTION TO BE KNOWN AS THE ILOCOS NORTE COLLEGE OF ARTS AND TRADES.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 5947
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1969/ra_5947_1969.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 5947, June 21, 1969 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING THE ILOCOS NORTE SCHOOL OF ARTS AND TRADE IN THE CITY OF LAOAG, INTO A TEACHER-TRAINING INSTITUTION TO BE KNOWN AS THE ILOCOS NORTE COLLEGE OF ARTS AND TRADES.**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Ilocos Norte School of Arts and Trades located in the City of Laoag, is hereby converted into a teacher-training institution to be known as the Ilocos Norte College of Arts and Trades effective upon availability of funds.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 2.** The Ilocos Norte College of Arts and Trades shall offer, in addition to the secondary and technical trade curricula, the complete teacher-education curriculum leading to the degrees of Bachelor of Science in Industrial Education (BSIE) and Bachelor of Science in Industrial Arts (BSIA).
>
> **Section 3.** The Ilocos Norte College of Arts and Trades shall be headed by a Superintendent of Arts and Trades IV and shall be under the supervision and administration of the Bureau of Vocational Education.
>
> **Section 4.** The sum of two hundred thousand pesos is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, as additional fund for the operation and maintenance of the Ilocos Norte College of Arts and Trades, for the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-seven. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for said purpose shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 5.** The Director of Vocational Education is hereby empowered to reorganize said school accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Enacted without Executive approval, **June 21, 1969.**
>
>
>
