# Republic Act No. 5507

**AN ACT CONVERTING CAROMATAN AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF CAROMATAN, PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL NORTE INTO A COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS LANAO DEL NORTE AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 5507
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1969/ra_5507_1969.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 5507, June 21, 1969 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CONVERTING CAROMATAN AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF CAROMATAN, PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL NORTE INTO A COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS LANAO DEL NORTE AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR.**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and, House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Caromatan Agricultural School located in the Municipality of Caromatan, Province of Lanao del Norte, is hereby converted into a college to be known as Lanao del Norte Agricultural College.
>
> **Section 2.** Lanao del Norte Agricultural College shall offer, in addition to the secondary agricultural curriculum, the following collegiate courses:
>
> > (a) Four-year technical agricultural leading to the degree of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture
> >
> > (b) Four-year teacher education leading to the degree Bachelor of Science in Agricultural Education
> >
> > (c) Two-year technical agriculture leading to the title of Associate in Agriculture
>
> **Section 3.** Lanao del Norte Agricultural College shall be led by a Superintendent of Agricultural Instruction and shall be under the Bureau of Vocational Education. superintendent shall have direct administration and supervision over all the other agricultural schools in the  province under the Bureau of Vocational Education.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of Education is hereby empowered to reorganize said school accordingly.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> **Section 5.** Three hundred thousand pesos is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the operation and maintenance of said college, in addition to the present national appropriation of the said school. Thereafter, the necessary sum for the operation and maintenance of said college shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved, June 21, 1969.
>
>
>
