# Republic Act No. 5653

**AN ACT CREATING A BRANCH OFFICE OF THE REGISTER OF DEEDS IN THE PROVINCE OF SAMAR, WITH PERMANENT STATION AT THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUIUAN, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR.**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 5653
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1969/ra_5653_1969.html)

---

> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 5653, June 21, 1969 ]**
>
> **AN ACT CREATING A BRANCH OFFICE OF THE REGISTER OF DEEDS IN THE PROVINCE OF SAMAR, WITH PERMANENT STATION AT THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUIUAN, AND AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS THEREFOR.**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** There is hereby created a branch office of the Register of Deeds in the Province of Samar, with permanent station at the Municipality of Guiuan, which shall be under the immediate control and supervision of a deputy register of deeds to be appointed by the Secretary of Justice. The said deputy register of deeds shall be considered as Class III under WAPCO classification and shall receive compensation within the range now provided by laws and regulations. He shall be assisted by such additional personnel, likewise appointed by the Secretary of Justice, as may be necessary to carry out the duties appurtenant to the said branch office.
>
> **Section 2** The sum of fifty thousand pesos, or so much thereof as may be necessary, is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out .of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to carry out the purposes of this Act. Thereafter, the sums necessary for the same purpose shall be included in the annual General Appro­priations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.1a⍵⍴h!1
>
> Approved, June 21, 1969.
>
>
>
