# MC 2021-02 | Hiring/Engagement of Cooperative External Auditors for 2020 Financial Statements of Cooperatives *[REPEALED]

## Metadata
- **MC Number**: MC-2021-02
- **Year**: 2021
- **Source**: [https://cda.gov.ph/memorandum-circulars/mc-2021-02-hiring-engagement-of-cooperative-external-auditors-for-2020-financial-statements-of-cooperatives/](https://cda.gov.ph/memorandum-circulars/mc-2021-02-hiring-engagement-of-cooperative-external-auditors-for-2020-financial-statements-of-cooperatives/)
- **PDF URL**: [https://cda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/MC-2021-02-ONAR.pdf](https://cda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/MC-2021-02-ONAR.pdf)

---

--- PAGE 1 ---

se
COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY PHILIPPINES

827 Aurora Bivd., Service Road, Brgy. Immaculate Conception, 1111 Cubao, Quezon City, Philippines
@® htipj/www.cdagov.ech E)helpdesk@cdagovph cpa  ecpaphiis 3 Px Cooperatives

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 2021-02

Series of 2021

TO : ALL CONCERNED COOPERATIVES AND COOPERATIVE
EXTERNAL AUDITORS

SUBJECT : HIRING/ENGAGEMENT OF .COOPERATIVE EXTERNAL
AUDITORS FOR 2020 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF
COOPERATIVES

On account of the public health emergency declared by President Rodrigo
Duterte in 2020, most cooperatives failed to conduct their annual general assembly
meetings, where the hiring and engagement of their external auditors should have
been approved.

In view thereof, the Authority hereby issues the following guidelines relative to
the hiring or engagement of cooperative external auditors:

a) Cooperatives which failed to hold their general assembly meetings may hire
a cooperative external auditor, subject to confirmation by the general
assembly on their meetings this year 2021;

b) Section 9 (h) of MC No. 2019-10, or the Revised Guidelines on the
Accreditation of Cooperative External Auditors, shall apply, thus, no
cooperative external auditor, whether individual or firm, shall undertake
external audit to a specific cooperative for more than five (5) years; and

c) No cooperative external auditor shall be hired or engaged by a cooperative
without valid accreditation from the CDA.

For strict compliance.
Approved per CDA Board Resolution No. 028, S-2021 dated January 22, 2021.

DATE: February 4, 2021

eee ca FOR THE CDA BOARD:
Administrauve Rules and ©
-_ | it ORLANDO R/RAVANERA
} 4 \ \})
\)) FEB 0 ms \\) Chairpetson ,
Wy ys

(A

" ® Ff
TUVRheinland
- CERTIFIED

socapamnsrecy a 3

‘\\ Management
System

Office of the Chairman : (02) 8721-5325 ISO 9001-2015

(02) 8721-5324
Office of the Executive Director :(02) 8725-6450 |
Officer of the Day :(02) 8725-3764

Excellence, Commitment Integrity ond FEamwork j www.tuy.com

ID 9105070733
