# EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 414

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE CALATAGAN PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY.**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 414
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2005/eo_414_2005.html)

---

> **MALACAÑANG**
> Manila
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
>
>
> **EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 414             March 7, 2005**
>
> **DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE CALATAGAN PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY**
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Port of Calatagan, Municipality of Batangas is being developed as a Roll-on/Roll-off terminal to complement Tilik Port in Lubang Island, Occidental Mindoro;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the development of the said partner ports will promote rapid development of the areas concerned through improved trade, commerce and tourism activities;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the port zone delineation, which has a total area of 289, 371.64 square meters, is necessary to establish the territorial jurisdiction of the Calatagan Port for its proposed development;
>
> WHEREAS, the Sectoral Committee on Infrastructure Development (SCID) has approved and endorsed the project on 27 April 2004 through SCID Resolution No. IV-A-04-2004.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Calatagan, Municipality of Batangas is hereby delineated and established and particularly described as follows:
>
> "Beginning at the Tie Line form BLLM #1, Mp. Calatagan, Batangas to cor. "1" at a distance of 1,250.09m with bearing S 22° 18’ W thence to point 2 at a distance of 18.63m. with bearing S 30° 37’ E, thence to point 3 at a distance of 38.79m. with bearing S 17° 15’ E, thence to point 4 at a distance of 50.00m with bearing S 46° 57’, E, thence to point 5 at a distance of 1,000.00m with bearing S 43° 03’ W, thence to point 6 at a distance of 305.90m with bearing N 32° 03’ W, thence to point 7 at a distance of 982.55m with bearing N 43° 03’ E, thence to point 8 at a distance of 42.17m with bearing S 50° 13’ E, thence to point, thence to point 1, the point of the beginning at a distance of 156.90m with bearing S 32° 30’ E, the total area comprising of …sq. meters more or less.
>
> **Section 2.** The Calatagan Port Zone, as delineated and established, is hereby placed under the administration of the Philippine Ports Authority, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the Government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development and utilization of the port.
>
> **Section 3.** All orders, proclamations and issuances or portions thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 7th day of March in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand Five.
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
>
>
> By the President:
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> *Executive Secretary*
>
>
>
