# EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 411

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE MANSALAY PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY.**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 411
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2005/eo_411_2005.html)

---

> **MALACAÑANG**
> Manila
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
>
>
> **EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 411             March 7, 2005**
>
> **DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE MANSALAY PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY**
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Port of Mansalay, Oriental Mindoro plays a major role in the Strong Republic Nautical Highway (SRNH) being identified as one of the major routes;
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to delineate the Port of Mansalay to accommodate future development of the port that will be necessitated once traffic from the SRNH increases and so with the demands of the shipping trade within the region;
> **WHEREAS,** the proposed port zone delineation for the Port of Mansalay was favorably endorsed by the Regional Development Council (RDC IV-B [MIMAROPA]) through Resolution No. 08-037-2004 on October 08, 2004.
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Republic of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
> **Section 1.** The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of Mansalay, Oriental Mindoro is hereby delineated and established and particularly described as follows:
>
> "Beginning at point marked 1 on the plan, thence to point 2 at a
> distance of 137.57m. with bearing S 68 11’ E, thence to point 3 at a
> distance of 100.00m. with bearing S 40 51’ E, thence to point 4 at a
> distance of 491.05m. with bearing S 27 38’ W, thence to point 5 at a
> distance of 339.74m. with bearing N 65 52’ W, thence to pint 6 at a
> distance of 500m. with bearing N 25 10 E, thence to point 1, the point of
> beginning at a distance of 135.35m with bearing S 77 22’ E,
> the total area comprising of 182,135 square meter more or less.
>
> **Section 2.** The Mansalay Port Zone, as delineated and established, is hereby placed under the administration of the Philippine Ports Authority, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the Government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development and utilization of the port.
> **Section 3.** All orders, proclamations and issuances or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby amended, repealed or modified accordingly.
> **Section 4.** This Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
>
>
>
> By the President:
>
>
>
> (Sgd.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> *Executive Secretary*
>
>
>
