# Executive Order No. 451

**EXTENDING FURTHER THE DURATION OF OPERATION OF THE PRESIDENTIAL MIDDLE EAST PREPAREDNESS COMMITTEE (PMEPC) to DECEMBER 31, 2005**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 451
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2005/eo_451_2005.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 451
>
> EXTENDING FURTHER THE DURATION OF OPERATION OF THE PRESIDENTIAL MIDDLE EAST PREPAREDNESS COMMITTEE (PMEPC) to DECEMBER 31, 2005
>
> WHEREAS, the term of the Presidential Middle East Preparedness Committee (PMEPC) expires on June 30, 2005 pursuant to Executive Order (EO) No. 401 dated January 20, 2005;
>
> **WHEREAS,** tensions in the Middle East continue to exist particularly in Iraq, which pose a serious threat to the security of Filipino overseas workers in that area;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the safety and welfare of some 1.4 million overseas Filipino workers in the Middle East is of primordial concern to the national government;
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is still a need for the PMEPC to continue monitoring developments and update contingency measures to ensure the safety of Filipinos in Iraq and in the Middle East;
>
> **WHEREAS,** under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the functions of the Office of the President;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the extension of operation of the PMEPC to December 31, 2005 or unless otherwise directed by the President.
>
> **SECTION 1.** *Functions.* – The PMEPC shall continue to exercise its functions and responsibilities as provided under EO 159 dated December 23, 2003, in relation to EO 194 and EO 195, both dated April 14, 2003, until December 31, 2005.
>
> **SECTION 2.** *Composition.* – The membership of the Committee, as enumerated under Section 3 of EO 159, is further expanded to include representatives from:
>
> The Overseas Workers’ Welfare Administration;
>
> The Philippine Overseas Employment Administration;
>
> The Office of the Usec. For Migrant Workers Affairs, DFA;
>
> The Office of the Usec. For Special Concerns, DFA; and
>
> The Office of Middle East and African Affairs, DFA.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Funding.* – The Committee shall be provided an additional funding allocation of FOUR MILLION PESOS (P4,000,000.00) for its administrative and operational expenses to be provided by the Office of the President. Additional financial requirements that may be needed by the Committee shall be sourced out by the Department of Budget and Management from available funds of the concerned agencies forming part of the PMEPC, subject to the usual government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Repeal.* – All other rules, regulations and issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 5.** *Effectivity.* – This Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (SGD.) **EDUARDO R. ERMITA**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
> Source: Malacañang Records Office
> Office of the President of the Philippines. (2005). [Executive Order Nos. : 401 – 500]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.
>
>
