# Republic Act No. 9848

**AN ACT CREATING FIVE ADDITIONAL BRANCHES OF THE REGIONAL TRIAL COURT AND ELEVEN ADDITIONAL BRANCHES OF THE METROPOLITAN TRIAL COURT IN THE NATIONAL CAPITAL JUDICIAL REGION TO BE STATIONED AT MANDALUYONG CITY, FURTHER AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE BATAS PAMBANSA BILANG 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9848
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2009/ra_9848_2009.html)

---

> Fourteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand nine.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 9848**
>
> AN ACT CREATING FIVE ADDITIONAL BRANCHES OF THE REGIONAL TRIAL COURT AND ELEVEN ADDITIONAL BRANCHES OF THE METROPOLITAN TRIAL COURT IN THE NATIONAL CAPITAL JUDICIAL REGION TO BE STATIONED AT MANDALUYONG CITY, FURTHER AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE BATAS PAMBANSA BILANG 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS "THE JUDICIARY REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1980", AS AMENDED, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Five (5) additional Regional Trial Court branches for Mandaluyong City, with seats thereat, are hereby created in the National Capital Judicial Region.
>
> **Section 2.** Eleven (11) additional Metropolitan Trial Court branches for Mandaluyong City, with seats thereat, are hereby created in the National Capital Judicial Region.
>
> **Section 3.** The Supreme Court shall assign the branch number for the newly created branches.
>
> **Section 4.** Accordingly, Section 14(d) and Section 27 of Batas Pambansa Bilang 129, otherwise known as "The Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980", as amended, as well as other provisions that may be consistent herewith, are hereby deemed repealed, modified and/or further amended.
>
> **Section 5.** The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, in coordination with the Secretary of the Department of Justice, shall immediately include, as may be determined on a priority basis, in the Court's program the implementation of this Act. The funding therefor shall likewise be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.lawphil
>
> **Section 6.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **PROSPERO C. NOGRALES** Speaker of the House of Representatives | **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate |
>
> This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 3441 and House Bill No. 4265 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on October 7, 2009 and October 15, 2009, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives | **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of the Senate |
>
> Approved: DEC. 11, 2009
>
> **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
