# Republic Act No. 9793

**AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF EASTERN VISAYAS REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER IN TACLOBAN CITY FROM TWO HUNDRED FIFTY (250) TO FIVE HUNDRED (500), UPGRADING ITS SERVICE AND FACILITIES AND PROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE, AUTHORIZING THE INCREASE OF ITS MEDICAL PERSONNEL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9793
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2009/ra_9793_2009.html)

---

> Fourteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand nine.*
>
> **Republic Act No. 9793**
>
> AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF EASTERN VISAYAS REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER IN TACLOBAN CITY FROM TWO HUNDRED FIFTY (250) TO FIVE HUNDRED (500), UPGRADING ITS SERVICE AND FACILITIES AND PROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE, AUTHORIZING THE INCREASE OF ITS MEDICAL PERSONNEL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The authorized bed capacity of the Eastern Visayas Regional Medical Center (EVRMC) in Tac!oban City is hereby upgraded from two hundred fifty (250) to five hundred (500) beds.
>
> **Section 2.** The existing service facilities and professional health care services of the EVRMC are hereby upgraded to conform with and be commensurate to the bed capacity increase as provided for in Section 1 hereof.
>
> **Section 3.** The existing workforce of the EVRMC shall also be correspondingly increased. The Department of Health, in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management and the Civil Service Commission, shall determine the additional plantilla positions to be created and filled up upon prior consultation with the EVRMC.
>
> **Section 4.** The increase in bed capacity of the EVRMC from two hundred fifty (250) to five hundred (500) beds shall be implemented for a period of not more than four (4) years from the approval of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** The Secretary of Health shall immediately include in the Department's programs the implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate | **PROSPERO C. NOGRALES** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on March 5, 2009 and September 8, 2009, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of the Senate | **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: NOV. 19, 2009
>
> **GLORIA MACAPAGAL - ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
