# Republic Act No. 9977

**AN ACT SEPARATING THE MONKAYO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - AWAO ANNEX IN BARANGAY AWAO, MUNICIPALITY OF MONKAYO, PROVINCE OF COMPOSTELLA VALLEY FROM THE MONKAYO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS AWAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9977
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2010/ra_9977_2010.html)

---

> Fourteenth Congress
>
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand nine.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9977**
>
> AN ACT SEPARATING THE MONKAYO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL - AWAO ANNEX IN BARANGAY AWAO, MUNICIPALITY OF MONKAYO, PROVINCE OF COMPOSTELLA VALLEY FROM THE MONKAYO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, CONVERTING IT INTO AN INDEPENDENT NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS AWAO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representative of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** *Separation and Conversion into a National High School.* - The Monkayo National High School - Awao Annex in Barangay Awao, Municipality of Monkayo National High School and converted into an independent national high school school to be known as Awao National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** *Transfer of Assets and Liabilities.* - All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Monkayo National High School - Awao Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Awao National High School.
>
> **Section 3.** *Appropriations.* - The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department's program the operationalization of the Awao National High School, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Monkayo Natonal High School - Awao Annex. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation of the school shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** *Implementation.* - The Secretary of Education shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette.
>
> Approved,
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **PROSPERO C. NOGRALES** Speaker of the House of Representatives | (Sgd.) **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 2, 2008 and October 6, 2009, respectively.
>
>
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
>
>
> Approved: **FEB 10 2010**
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
