# Republic Act No. 9833

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE SANDIGAN HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY CALAYUGAN NORTE, MUNICIPALITY OF LOON, PROVINCE OF BOHOL INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS SANDIGAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9833
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2009/ra_9833_2009.html)

---

> Fourteenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand nine.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 9833               December 10, 2009**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE SANDIGAN HIGH SCHOOL IN BARANGAY CALAYUGAN NORTE, MUNICIPALITY OF LOON, PROVINCE OF BOHOL INTO A NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL TO BE KNOWN AS SANDIGAN NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representative of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** *Conversion into a National High School.* - The Sandigan High School in Barangay Calayugan Norte, Municipality of Loon, Province of Bohol is hereby converted into a national high school to be known as Sandigan National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** *Transfer of Assets and Liabilities.* - All personnel assets, liabilities and records of the Sandigan High School are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Sandigan National High School.
>
> **Section 3.** *Appropriations.* - The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department's program the operationalization of the Sandigan National High School, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year's appropriations of the Sandigan High School. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation of the school shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** Implementation. - The Secretary of Education shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette.*
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of the Senate | **PROSPERO C. NOGRALES** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on September 2, 2008 and September 28, 2009, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of the Senate | **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: DEC 10 2009
>
> **GLORIA MACAPAGAL - ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
