# Republic Act No. 9693

**AN ACT RECONSTITUTING THE ALBAY ENGINEERING DISTRICT OFFICES IN THE PROVINCE OF ALBAY INTO THREE (3) REGULAR DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICES AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 9693
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2009/ra_9693_2009.html)

---

> Fourteenth Congress
>
> Second Regular Session
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand eight.*
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9693, August 04, 2009 ]**
>
> **AN ACT RECONSTITUTING THE ALBAY ENGINEERING DISTRICT OFFICES IN THE PROVINCE OF ALBAY INTO THREE (3) REGULAR DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICES AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representative of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** The Albay District Engineering Offices, under the supervision of the Department of Public Works and Highways, shall be reconstituted into three (3) separate district engineering offices to be respectively named as follows: (1) Albay First District Engineering Officel; (2) Albay Second District Engienering Office; and (3) Albay Third District Engineering Office.
>
> **Section 2.** The Albay First District Engineering Office to be located in Tabaco City shall comprise the City of Tabaco and the municipalities of Tiwi, Malinao, Malilipot, Bacacay and Sto. Domingo. The existing district engineering office located in Legaspi City shall be known as the Albay Second District Engineering Office and shall comprise the City of Legaspi and the municipalities of Rapu-Rapu, Manito, Camalig and Daraga.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> The Albay Third District Engineering Office located in Polangui shall comprise the City of Ligao and the municipalities of Guinobatan, Jovellar, Pio Duran, Oas, Polangui and Libon.ᇈWᑭHIL
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Public Works and Highways shall include in the Department's program the operationalization of these three (3) district engineering offices, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** The relevant provisions of Sections 1 and 2 of Republic Act No. 9220 are hereby modified or amended accordingly.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **JUAN PONCE ENRILE** President of Senate | (Sgd.) **PROSPERO C. NOGRALES** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on March 10, 2008 and May 26, 2009, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **EMMA LIRIO-REYES** Secretary of Senate | (Sgd.) **MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: AUG 04 2009
>
> (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
