# GR-268308

**Elpidio Que Vs. Philippine Heart Center, Dr. Avelino P. Aventura, and First Associated Medical Distribution Co., Inc**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: Elpidio Que Vs. Philippine Heart Center, Dr. Avelino P. Aventura, and First Associated Medical Distribution Co., Inc
- **Ponente**: LEONEN, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: APR 0 2202
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/268308.pdf)

---

> Supreme Court
> Baguio Citp
>
> SECOND DIVISION
> ELPIDIO QUE, G.R. No. 268308
> Petitioner,
> Present:
>
> — versus —
>
> LEONEN, S.A./., Chairperson,
> PHILIPPINE HEART CENTER, LAZARO-JAVIER,
> DR. AVELINO P. AVENTURA, LOPEZ, M.,
> and FIRST ASSOCIATED ~~ LOPEZ, J., and
> MEDICAL DISTRIBUTION — KHO, JR., JV.
>
> CO., INC.,
> Respondents. Promulgated:
>
> APR 0 2 20
> a Xx
> DECISION
>
> LOPEZ, M., J.:
>
> This Petition! questions the Decision’ dated July 3, 2023 of the Court
> of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CV No. 115245 that denied Elpidio Que’s
> (Elpidio) appeal of the Decision’ dated January 30, 2020 of Branch 20,
> Regional Trial Court, Vigan City, Ilocos Sur (RTC). The CA and the RTC
> dismissed Elpidio’s Complaint for Damages‘ filed against the Philippine —
> Heart Center (PHC), Dr. Avenilo P. Aventura (Dr. Aventura), First Associated
> Medical Distribution Co., Inc. (FAMED; collectively, respondents),
> Medtronic International Ltd., and Medtronic Philippines, Inc. (jointly,
> Medtronic), and Dr. Eric Verhoeven (Dr. Verhoeven), for the death of his
> father, Quintin Que (Quintin).
>
> ' Rollo, pp. 10-99.
>
> Id. at 101-161. Penned by Associate Justice Jennifer Joy C. Ong and concurred in by Associate Justices
> Apolinario D. Bruselas, Jr. and Geraldine C. Fiel-Macaraig of the Fifth Division, Court of Appeals,
> Manila.
>
> 4 Id. at 933-1016. Penned by Judge Marita Bernales Balloguing.
>
> 4 Id. at 1017-1025.
>
>
> Decision 2 G.R. No. 268308 _
>
> ANTECEDENTS
>
> The Complaint alleged that sometime in May 1999, Quintin was
> brought to Dr. Aventura, Head of the Department of Surgery at the PHC, for
> medical consultation, due to an aneurysm in the aortic arch, which affected
> Quintin’s vocal cords. Dr. Aventura then advised Quintin to undergo a spinal
> CT scan at the Makati Medical Center. The CT scan confirmed the aneurysm,
> which would require Quintin to undergo an open-method surgery since the
> aneurysm could burst and be fatal. Dr. Aventura also advised Quintin to
> undergo an angiogram and aortogram at the PHC.°
>
> In June 1999, Quintin underwent an angiogram and aortogram. Further,
> Dr. Aventura performed a three-vessel coronary aorta bypass surgery on
> Quintin. He told the Que family that an open-method surgery would be
>
> performed on him after a month, depending on his condition. After that, ~
>
> Quintin was discharged from the hospital and had regular check-ups with Dr.
> Aventura, who continuously updated the Que family about Quintin’s progress
> and the need for open-method surgery. However, sometime in October 1999,
> Dr. Aventura recommended a new non-invasive treatment for an aneurysm, a
> “state-of-the-art” procedure that uses a custom-built gadget called a stent and
> is an alternative to open-method surgery: The Que family had reservations
> about the procedure, but Dr. Aventura assured them that the operation would
> be less risky than the traditional open-method surgery since there was less risk
> of bleeding or rupture of the aneurysm itself and a smaller chance of
> paralysis.° Eventually, the Que family decided to push through since Dr.
> Aventura told them that Quintin’s aneurysm was fatal and the stenting
> procedure was “virtually risk-free.”’
>
> Afterward, Quintin was admitted to the PHC on February 12, 2000. On
> the scheduled operation on February 14, 2000, Dr. Aventura introduced Dr.
> Verhoeven to the Que family as the Belgian doctor specializing in stenting
> procedures. With him was Daphne Sim, who was introduced as a product
> specialist of Medtronic International Limited of Singapore—the distributor in
> Asia of World Medical Mfg. Corporation of Florida, United States of
> America, the manufacturer of the Talent brand of stent graft system to be used
> on Quintin. Three representatives from FAMED were also present. FAMED
> was introduced as the Philippine distributor of Talent. Dr. Verhoeven also
> showed the Que family a long catheter and three stents labeled “Quintin Que”
> and “Custom Built.” He announced the system product as state-of-the-art, and
> it would be the first time it would be used in Asia. He also demonstrated to
> the Que family how the stents would be deployed into Quintin’s body,
> remarking that it would be his first time to deploy a stent into a curve like the
> aortic arch.®
>
> Id. at 105, 933, 1018.
>
> Id. at 105-106, 933, 1018-1019.
> Id. at 107, 1011.
>
> Id. at 107-108, 934, 1019-1020.
>
> one |
>
>
> Decision 3 G.R. No. 268308
>
> At noon, Dr. Verhoeven came out of the operating room “looking sad
> and tired.” When the Que family inquired about the result of Quintin’s
> procedure, he responded that he could not complete the operation because he
> could not go through the bend/curve where the stent should have been
> deployed. After all, the device on hand was “faulty.”
>
> Quintin never woke up and suffered a stroke after the incomplete
> stenting procedure. From February 15, 2000 until Quintin’s death on February
> 27, 2000, the Que family constantly communicated with Dr. Aventura, but the
> latter “turned his back” on them.'° Suspecting that human error caused the
> death of Quintin, the family had Quintin’s body autopsied by Dr. Raquel B.
> Del Rosario-Fortun (Dr. Fortun), who issued a Report!! stating that “Autopsy
> findings show multiple hemorrhagic infarcts of the brain due to
> thrombotic/atheromatous emboli probably arising from the aortic aneurysm
> and triggered by the catheterization. Based on available information on the
> circumstances surrounding death and the autopsy findings, death is due to
> complications of hypertensive atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and the
> manner of death is therefore classified as natural.”'* The Que family also
> discovered that Dr. Verhoeven was not qualified or admitted to practice
> medicine in the Philippines."
>
> Thus, on March 18, 2002, Elpidio filed a Complaint for Damages!*
> against the PHC, FAMED, Medtronic, Dr. Aventura, and Dr. Verhoeven
> (collectively, defendants).!>
>
> In his Answer,'° Dr. Aventura claimed that Quintin went to consult with
> him sometime in May 1999. After several tests, he advised Quintin to address
> the coronary problem first by undergoing a bypass and then addressing the
> aneurysm in a later procedure. After the successful bypass operation in June
> 1999, he advised Quintin on July 19, 1999 to return for a follow-up check-up
> after a month for his aneurysm. However, Quintin returned after three months,
> on October 27, 1999. By then, Dr. Aventura observed that Quintin’s voice’s
> hoarseness worsened, indicating that the aneurysm had grown. He then
> reiterated that the aneurysm put Quintin’s life at risk. He gave the following
> options to the Que family, which, like any other medical procedure, have no
> guarantee of success: one, aneurysmectomy and replacement—a rigorous
> operation that would require Quintin’s chest to be reopened, and the adhesions
> placed from the triple bypass operation to be removed; or two, endovascular
> stenting, or the stenting of the aorta, which entails a less invasive procedure
> where the chest need not be reopened. The second procedure would expose
> Quintin to the risk of death. Dr. Aventura also emphasized that he would not
>
> 9 Id. at 108, 934, 1020.
>
> 10 Id. at 108-109, 934, 1020-1021.
> Td. at 185-190.
>
> 12 Id. at 185.
>
> 13 Id. at 109, 934, 1021.
>
> 14 Id. at 1017-1025.
>
> '5. Id. at 102, 1017.
>
> 16 Id. at 305-322.
>
>
> Decision 4 G.R. No. 268308
>
> be the one to do the procedure. Quintin expressed his interest in stenting.!’
> After being informed of the risks and introduced to Dr. Verhoeven, Quintin
> consented to the stenting procedure."
>
> On February 14, 2000, Dr. Verhoeven performed the procedure on
> Quintin in the presence of Dr. Aventura, Dr. Juvenal Quitiquit, Dr. Ramon
> Ribu, and other medical staff of the PHC. However, Dr. Verhoeven was
> unable to deploy the stent in the desired location despite three attempts, as it
> appeared that Quintin eventually suffered a brain infarction. According to Dr.
> Aventura, this was possibly caused by manipulating the device to place the
> stent, which is one of the risks involved in stenting that could have been the
> result even if the stent had been successfully placed. Dr. Aventura averred that
> he could not interfere with Dr. Verhoeven as he was not the surgeon operating
> on Quintin and had no experience in stenting.!”
>
> RTC RULING
>
> On January 30, 2020, the trial court dismissed the Complaint for lack
> of merit,?° to wit:
>
> WHEREFORE, the instant case against all the defendants is
> DISMISSED for lack of merit.
>
> The counterclaims of all the defendants are _ likewise
> DISMISSED.
>
> SO DECIDED.”! (Emphasis in the original)
>
> The trial court ruled that Dr. Aventura was an ostensible agent of the
> PHC at the time of Quintin’s admission, treatment, and death. Evidence
> showed that the PHC clothed Dr. Aventura with apparent authority, leading
> Elpidio to believe that Dr. Aventura was connected to, or an agent of, the
> PHC. However, the trial court found no medical malpractice or negligence on
> the part of Dr. Aventura. The Autopsy Report issued by Dr. Fortun stated that
> Quintin died due to complications of hypertensive atherosclerotic
> cardiovascular disease, and the manner of his death was classified as natural.
> Also, Elpidio could not dispute Quintin’s signature on the two consent forms,
> i.e., Consent for Endovascular Stenting and the Consent to Operation,
> Administration of Anesthesia, and the Rendering of Other Medical Services.
> The trial court held that given Dr. Aventura’s qualifications and years of
> expertise, there is a presumption that in proper cases, he takes the necessary
> precautions and employs the best knowledge and skill in attending to his
> patients.”
>
> 7 Td. at 112-114, 309-312.
> 18 Id. at 115, 312.
>
> 19 Id. at 115, 934.
>
> 20 Id. at 1016.
>
> 21d.
>
> 22 Id. at 1001-1005.
>
>
> Decision 5 G.R. No. 268308
>
> Further, the trial court ruled that Elpidio failed to show that FAMED
> participated in the stent used on Quintin. It was merely one of Medtronic’s
> distributors in the Philippines. Even if the stent used on Quintin was faulty,
> Elpidio failed to prove that FAMED had a hand in manufacturing the stent.
> As for Medtronic and Dr. Verhoeven, the trial court did not acquire
> jurisdiction over them since they were not properly served with summons.”
>
> The trial court also ruled that defendants were not entitled to damages.
> The dismissal of the Complaint did not make Elpidio’s act unlawful, which
> would subject him to the payment of moral damages to them. Elpidio filed the
> Complaint based on his honest belief that the death of his father was due to
> the negligence of defendants. The trial court also denied defendants’ claim for
> exemplary damages and attorney’s fees for lack of basis.”4
>
> CA RULING
>
> On appeal,”> the CA affirmed the trial court.” It ruled that the answering
> defendants did not commit medical malpractice or negligence. The expert
> opinions of Dr. Edgar S. Tuazon (Dr. Tuazon) and Dr. Peter R. Figueroa (Dr.
> Figueroa), who specialize in cardiovascular surgery—the same field of
> medicine as Dr. Aventura—revealed that Dr. Aventura gave sound medical
> advice and treatment to Quintin. They also testified that the stroke experienced
> by Quintin, which led to his death, was not a result of medical negligence but
> was one of the risks involved in a stenting procedure, regardless of whether
> the device was successfully deployed on Quintin or not.?’
>
> 23 Id. at 1014.
> 24 Id. at 1015.
> 23 Id. at 126-127. Elpidio raised the following issues on appeal:
> I. THE LOWER COURT ERRED WHEN IT RULED THAT “NEITHER MEDICAL
> NEGLIGENCE, NOR MEDICAL MALPRACTICE IS SUSTAINABLE AGAINST
> THE DOCTOR.”
> Il. THE LOWER COURT ERRED WHEN IT RULED THAT THE STENT/STENTING
> PROCEDURE WAS NOT THE PROXIMATE CAUSE OF THE PATIENT’S
> DEATH, AS IT STRAINED AND SPLIT HAIRS TO DISTINGUISH THE STENT
> FROM THE STENTING PROCEDURE IN JUSTIFICATION.
> Il. THE LOWER COURT ERRED WHEN IT DISREGARDED THE AUTOPSY
> REPORT AS WELL AS THE EXPERT TESTIMONY OF DR. RAQUEL FORTUN
> THEREON (WHO PERSONALLY CONDUCTED THE AUTOPSY HERSELF)
> AND INSTEAD RELIED ON THE TESTIMONY OF DR. FIGUEROA, A FRIEND
> AND COLLEAGUE OF DEFENDANT-APPELLEE DR. AVENTURA WHO
> ADMITTEDLY HAD NO PERSONAIL KNOWLEDGE OF THE FACTS AND
> CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE DEATH OF THE PATIENT —
> CLEARLY AN “ARMCHAIR EXPERT” WHO MERELY BASED HIS SO-
> CALLED “EXPERT” TESTIMONY ON THE MEDICAL RECORD/CHART.
> IV. THE LOWER COURT ERRED WHEN IT LET DEFENDANT-APPELLEE FAMED
> “OFF THE HOOK” -- ADMITTEDLY THE DISTRIBUTOR OF THE “FAULTY”
> STENT — ON THE GROUND THAT “PLAINTIFF FAILED TO SHOW THAT
> FAMED HAD ANY PARTICIPATION IN THE MANUFACTURE OF THE
> TALENT STENT USED ON QUINTIN.
> 26 Id. at 160.
> 27 Id. at 132-143.
>
>
> Decision 6 G.R. No. 268308
>
> The CA held that there was adequate disclosure of material risks
> inherent in the stenting procedure, Quintin consented to the procedure, as
> shown in his signed consent forms. Further, the CA noted that one of the facts
> stipulated by the parties during the pre-trial conference was that the stenting
> as the “new non-invasive approach” has been used in the United States and
> Europe and entails “much less risk.” However, “less risk” is not equivalent to
> being “risk-free.”78
>
> The CA further ruled that there was no fault or negligence on the part.
>
> of the answering defendants in allowing Dr. Verhoeven to operate on Quintin.
> The PHC Charter (Presidential Decree No. 673)? allows foreign heart
> specialists and similar experts in various medical fields to train the personnel,
> trainees, or residents of the PHC. Dr. Verhoeven was among the licensed
> foreign doctors allowed by the PHC to operate in the hospital. Moreover, the
> CA held that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur does not apply in this case.
> Quintin’s death was one of the inherent risks in the stenting procedure; his
> death was not due to Dr. Aventura’s negligence.*°
>
> Regarding FAMED’s liability, the CA held that Elpidio failed to prove
> that the stent used on Quintin was defective upon delivery. Dr. Verhoeven’s
> purported statement that the stent was “faulty” is not enough, as there was no
> other evidence to ascertain the existence of the defect. Besides, the expert
> witnesses testified that even if the stent had been successfully deployed,
> Quintin would have had a cerebrovascular accident.>!
>
> Finally, no damages could be recovered since no fault or negligence can
> be attributed to the answering defendants for the death of Quintin.** The CA
> held:
>
> WHEREFORE, the appeal is DENIED. The Decision dated 30
> January 2020 of the Regional Trial Court of Vigan City, Ilocos Sur, Branch
> 20 in Civil Case No. 5712-V is hereby AFFIRMED.
>
> IT IS SO ORDERED.*? (Emphasis in the original)
>
> Aggrieved, Elpidio appealed to this Court,** insisting that Dr. Aventura
> assured them that the stenting procedure was “virtually risk-free.” He proffers
> that the Que family was not informed of the risks inherent to the stenting
> procedure, so if only they knew that Quintin would die, they would not have
> agreed to the procedure. In all, the collective negligence of respondents is the
> proximate cause of Quintin’s death. Elpidio further questions the validity and
> authenticity of consent forms allegedly signed by Quintin, which do not bear
>
> 28 Id. at 144-149,
>
> 29 Entitled “Creating the Philippine Heart Center for Asia” (1975).
> 30 Rollo, pp. 149-152.
>
> 31 Id. at 154-156.
>
> 32 Id. at 157-159.
>
> 33 Id. at 160.
>
> 34 Id. at 10-99,
>
> ta,
>
>
> Decision 7 G.R. No. 268308
>
> the signature of a witness. Regarding FAMED’: liability, Elpidio posits that
> FAMED is responsible for the faulty stent that was distributed without being
> approved for use by the United States Food and Drug Administration.*
>
> In its Comment,** the PHC counters that the Petition should be
> dismissed for raising factual questions outside this Court’s jurisdiction under
> a Rule 45 petition. At any rate, the PHC avers that the CA and the trial court
> correctly held that there was no medical negligence or liability for damages.
> Quintin’s death was one of the risks involved in a stenting procedure, and not
> because of the negligence of respondents.>’
>
> On the other hand,*® Dr. Aventura echoes the PHC that the instant
> Petition presents issues of facts that are not proper in a Rule 45 petition for
> review. Most importantly, the trial and appellate courts properly found him
> innocent of medical malpractice. Dr. Aventura insists that he acted with due
> diligence, care, and utmost good faith in treating Quintin.°*
>
> RULING
> The Petition is without merit.
>
> Prefatorily, we reiterate that a petition for review on certiorari under
> Rule 45 of the Rules of Court shall only raise questions of law. We are not a
> trier of facts. It is not our function to analyze and weigh the evidence that the
> lower courts have already passed upon. A question of law arises when there
> is doubt as to the applicable law and jurisprudence on a certain set of facts. It
> must not call for an examination of the probative value of the evidence. On
> the other hand, a question of fact exists when there is controversy as to the
> truth or falsity of the alleged facts.*° Thus:
>
> [flor a question to be one of law, its resolution must not involve an
> examination of the probative value of the evidence presented by the
> litigants, but must rely solely on what the law provides on the given set of
> facts. If the facts are disputed or if the issues require an examination of the
> evidence, the question posed is one of fact. The test, therefore, is not the
> appellation given to a question by the party raising it, but whether the
> appellate court can resolve the issue without examining or evaluating the
> evidence, in which case, it is a question of law; otherwise, it is a question of
> fact.‘! (Citations omitted)
>
> 35 Id. at 49-96.
>
> 36 Id. at 226-237.
>
> 37 Id. at 226-236.
>
> 38 Id. at 242-301.
>
> 39 Id. at 258-299.
>
> 40 Sugar Regulatory Administration v. Central Azucarera De Bais, Inc., G.R. No. 253821, March 6, 2023
> [Per J. M. Lopez, Second Division].
>
> 41 Far Eastern Surety and Insurance Co., Inc. y. People, 72\ Phil. 760, 767 (2013) [Per J. Brion, Second
> Division].
>
>
> Decision 8 G.R. No. 268308
>
> Elpidio implores the Court to evaluate anew the consent forms signed
> by his father authorizing the conduct of the stenting procedure as well as the
> “faultiness” of the stent used during the operation. These are factual matters
> beyond the Court’s power of review under Rule 45. On this basis alone, the
> Petition should be dismissed. Nonetheless, even if we disregard this
> procedural infirmity, we still found no reason to depart from the trial court’s
> ruling, as affirmed by the CA.
>
> Respondents are not liable for medical
> negligence
>
> Medical malpractice is a particular form of negligence that consists in
> the failure of a physician or surgeon to apply to his practice of medicine that
> degree of care and skill which is ordinarily employed by the profession
> generally, under similar conditions, and in like surrounding circumstances.”
> We declared in Borromeo v. Family Care Hospital, Inc.:”
>
> A medical professional has the duty to observe the standard of care
> and exercise the degree of skill, knowledge, and training ordinarily expected
> of other similarly trained medical professionals acting under the same
> circumstances. A breach of the accepted standard of care constitutes
> negligence or malpractice and renders the defendant liable for the resulting
> injury to his patient.** (Citation omitted)
>
> Therefore, to successfully pursue such a claim, a patient must prove
> that the physician or surgeon either failed to do something that a reasonably
> prudent physician or surgeon would have done or that they did something that
> a reasonably prudent physician or surgeon would not have done and that the
> failure or action caused injury to the patient.* In a lack of informed consent
> litigation, the plaintiff must prove the following: (1) the physician had a duty
> to disclose material risks; (2) the physician failed to disclose or inadequately
> disclosed those risks; (3) as a direct and proximate result of the failure to
> disclose, the patient consented to the treatment they otherwise would not have
> consented to; and (4) the patient was injured by the proposed treatment.”
>
> The Court explained the doctrine of informed consent in Li v. Spouses
>
> Soliman,” viz.:
>
> The doctrine of informed consent within the context of physician-
> patient relationships goes far back into English common law. As early as
> 1767, doctors were charged with the tort of “battery” (i.e., an unauthorized
> physical contact with a patient) if they had not gained the consent of their
> patients prior to performing a surgery or procedure. In the United States, the
> seminal case was Schoendorff v. Society of New York Hospital which
>
> 42 Cayao-Lasam y. Spouses Ramolete, 595 Phii. 56, 72 (2008) [Per J. Austria-Martinez, Third Division].
> 4 779 Phil. 1 (2016) [Per J. Brion, Second Division].
>
> 44 Id. at 12-13.
>
> “De Jesus v. Uyloan, 919 Phil. 878, 886 (2022) [Per C.J. Gesmundo, First Division].
>
> 46 Liv. Spouses Soliman, 666 Phil. 29, 57 (2011) [Per J. Villarama, Jr., En Banc].
> 47 Id.
>
>
> Decision 9 G.R. No. 268308
>
> involved unwanted treatment performed by a doctor. Justice Benjamin
> Cardozo’s oft-quoted opinion upheld the basic right of a patient to give
> consent to any medical procedure or treatment: “Every human being of adult
> years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be done with his
> own body; and a surgeon who performs an operation without his patient’s
> consent, commits an assault, for which he is liable in damages.” From a
> purely ethical norm, informed consent evolved into a general principle of
> law that a physician has a duty to disclose what a reasonably prudent
> physician in the medical community in the exercise of reasonable care
> would disclose to his patient as to whatever grave risks of injury might be
> incurred from a proposed course of treatment, so that a patient, exercising
> ordinary care for his own welfare, and faced with a choice of undergoing
> the proposed treatment, or alternative treatment, or none at all, may
> intelligently exercise his judgment by reasonably balancing the probable
> risks against the probable benefits.
>
> Subsequently, in Canterbury v. Spence[,] the court observed that the
> duty to disclose should not be limited to medical usage as to arrogate the
> decision on revelation to the physician alone. Thus, respect for the patient’s
> right of self-determination on particular therapy demands a standard set by
> law for physicians rather than one which physicians may or may not impose
> upon themselves. The scope of disclosure is premised on the fact that
> patients ordinarily are persons unlearned in the medical sciences.
> Proficiency in diagnosis and therapy is not the full measure of a physician’s
> responsibility. It is also his duty to warn of the dangers lurking in the
> proposed treatment and to impart information which the patient has every
> right to expect. Indeed, the patient’s reliance upon the physician is a trust of
> the kind which traditionally has exacted obligations beyond those associated
> with armslength transactions. The physician is not expected to give the
> patient a short medical education, the disclosure rule only requires of him a
> reasonable explanation, which means generally informing the patient in
> nontechnical terms as to what is at stake; the therapy alternatives open to
> him, the goals expectably to be achieved, and the risks that may ensue from
> particular treatment or no treatment. As to the issue of demonstrating what
> risks are considered material necessitating disclosure, it was held that
> experts are unnecessary to a showing of the materiality of a risk to a patient’s
> decision on treatment, or to the reasonably, expectable effect of risk
> disclosure on the decision. Such unrevealed risk that should have been made
> known must further materialize, for otherwise the omission, however
> unpardonable, is without legal consequence. And, as in malpractice actions
> generally, there must be a causal relationship between the physician’s failure
> to divulge and damage to the patient.
>
> Reiterating the foregoing considerations, Cobbs v. Grant deemed it
> as [an] integral part of physician’s overall obligation to [the] patient, the
> duty of reasonable disclosure of available choices with respect to proposed
> therapy and of dangers inherently and potentially involved in each.
> However, the physician is not obliged to discuss relatively minor risks
> inherent in common procedures when it is common knowledge that such
> risks inherent in procedure of very low incidence. Cited as exceptions to the
> rule that the patient should not be denied the opportunity to weigh the risks
> of surgery or treatment are emergency cases where it is evident he cannot
> evaluate data, and where the patient is a child or incompetent. The court thus
> concluded that the patient’s right of self-decision can only be effectively
> exercised if the patient possesses adequate information to enable him in
> making an intelligent choice. ‘The scope of the physician’s communications
> to the patient, then must be measured by the paticnt’s need, and that need is
>
>
> Decision 10 G.R. No. 268308
>
> whatever information is material to the decision. The test therefore for
> determining whether a potential peri] must be divulged is its materiality to
> the patient’s decision.
>
> Cobbs v. Grant further reiterated the pronouncement in Canterbury
> v. Spence that for liability of the physician for failure to inform patient, there
> must be causal relationship between physician’s failure to inform and the
> injury to patient and such connection arises only if it is established that, had
> revelation been made, consent to treatment would not have been given.
>
> [T]he gravamen in an informed consent case requires the plaintiff to
> “point to significant undisclosed information relating to the treatment which
> would have altered her decision to undergo it.”“8 (Citations omitted)
>
> It is without doubt that, as Quintin’s physician, Dr. Aventura has to use
> the same level of care that any reasonably competent doctor would use to treat
> Quintin’s condition.” However, Quintin died 13 days after the unsuccessful
> stenting procedure on February 14, 2000. The questions are whether Dr.
> Aventura’s actions caused harm to Quintin and whether these were the
> proximate cause of Quintin’s death. We join and affirm the ruling of the trial
> and appellate courts.
>
> The facts would show that Dr. Aventura informed the Que family, most
> especially Quintin, of the material risks inherent in the stenting procedure, and
> that includes death. Dr. Aventura also informed the family that if they decide
> to continue the operation, another physician will operate on Quintin because
> he does not specialize in stenting procedures. The trial court observed:
>
> Dr. Aventura openly disclosed to the Que’s that he was not a specialist in
> stenting procedure and it would be a foreign doctor specializing in stenting
> to do the job on Quintin.
>
> In contrast, Dr. Aventura was able to clearly explain the limits of his
> participation in the stenting procedure done on Quintin Que. He in fact, does
> not deny that the use of the stent involved risk but vigorously denied telling
> [the] Ques that the procedure was “virtually risk-free.” This was the reason
> why he made it a point to explain the procedure to [the] Que family and the
>
> _ coming of foreign specialist or expert to do the procedure since he was not
> trained to do it. Such fact was known to the Ques right from the start. The
> records show that Dr. Aventura has the necessary training and skill to
> practice his chosen field. [Elpidio] did not rebut the evidence presented by
> Dr. Aventura regarding his qualifications — that he has been a physician for
> decades at the time [Elpidio} brought his father to him; that the doctor has
> had various medical trainings here and abroad; he was the first Director of
> the [PHC] and he specializes in cardiothoracic and vascular surgery.
> Jurisprudence provides that when the qualifications of a physician are
> admitted, there is a presumption that in proper cases, he takes the necessary
>
> 48 Id. at $4—57.
> 49 Garcia-Rueda v. Pascasio, 344 Phil. 323, 332 (1997) [Per J. Romero, Second Division].
>
>
> Decision 11 G.R. No. 268308
>
> precaution and employs the best of his knowledge and skill in attending to
> his clients. Even Dr. Figueroa declared that Dr. Aventura at all times
> followed standard operating procedure and exercise his sound judgment that
> are supported by medical science.~°
>
> To be sure, Quintin signed the Consent for Endovascular Stenting and
> the Consent to Operation, Administration of Anesthesia, and the Rendering of
> Other Medical Services.°' His signature appeared in these documents. On the
> other hand, Elpidio did not categorically dispute the veracity of Quintin’s
> signature. Absent proof that Quintin’s signature was forged or Quintin was
> incapable of giving intelligent consent when he signed the two documents, we
> upheld the validity of the consent forms. Accordingly, the lack of signatures
> of witnesses is irrelevant.
>
> Furthermore, expert witnesses Dr. Tuazon and Dr. Figueroa, both
> experts in the field of cardiovascular and endovascular surgery, testified that
> stenting would still be the sound medical advice and treatment for Quintin
> rather than the open-method surgery, considering his underlying condition.
> Dr. Tuazon explained in his Judicial Affidavit:
>
> 47. Q: Having examined the [sic] Quintin Que’s chart, what is the
> recommended option for him given his conditions at that time?
> A: I would recommend stenting over open repair because open
> repair would entail opening the patient’s chest and since Quintin
> Que previously underwent a triple bypass, the risks of stenting
> are lower than an open procedure. Quintin Que also had a fairly
> advanced age and had severe pulmonary disease which could
> lead to respiratory complications after an open procedure. |
> would also not recommend doing nothing because the risks of
> death outweigh the risks of undergoing stenting procedure. An
> aneurysm must be treated as soon as possible because it enlarges
> overtime. This also translates to an increased risk of the
> aneurysm rupturing. Also, Quintin Que had just undergone a
> coronary artery bypass graft procedure for his coronary artery
> disease. It is not uncommon for one to have a coronary artery
> disease and peripheral arterial disease occurring at the same time
> since both are caused by atherosclerosis, a condition I earlier
> explained, which is a common cause for his aneurysm.
>
> 58. Q: Considering the risk factor for thromboembolism, does aortic
> stenting still have lesser or lower risk than an open repair?
>
> A: Yes. The risk of undergoing an open procedure in this case is
> almost prohibitive. A lesser invasive type of procedure to treat
> aneurysm is the ideal way to go. Unfortunately, there are
> complications inherent to the stenting procedure and the patient
> risk factors as well.°4 |
>
> 3° Rollo, pp. 1005, 1011.
> 31 fd. at 147--148.
> 32 Id. at 193-207.
> 3 Id. at 200-202.
>
>
> Decision 12 G.R. No. 268308
>
> Dr. Figueroa corroborated Dr. Tuazon’s testimony in his Judicial
> Affidavit:
>
> 30. Q: What are the ways to inanage an aneurysm?
>
> A: There are different ways to manage an aneurysm. One way is the
> removal of the aneurysm by resection or aneurysmectomy. This
> would be the conventional method of surgical intervention
> through a thoracotomy and it involves cutting off the involved
> segment and replacing it with an artificial dacron graft. Across
> the board, the risk of death in surgical resection is from 5-12%.
> The other way is less invasive procedure, which is stenting.
>
> 31. What is stenting?
>
> Stenting is a less invasive procedure to repair an aneurysm that
> does not involve open heart surgery. In stenting, the incision will
> be made through the groin and a stent, which is manufactured by
> medical companies, will be pushed inside the opening of the
> artery by using a x-ray guidance.
>
> > O
>
> 34. You mentioned that stenting has risks. What are these risks?
> Although less invasive, stenting still has risks. These risks range
>
> from bleeding, rupture of the aneurysm, stroke and death.
>
> >
>
> 44. Q: Given the circumstances and the increase in risk, would you, in
> your expert opinion, still recommend stenting to treat Quintin
> Que’s aneurysm?
> A: Yes, because if an aneurysm is left untreated it will expand and
> rupture eventually causing death.
>
> 45. Q: Fora patient, such as Quintin Que, who has undergone a triple
> bypass operation, would you still recommend resecting or
> aneurysmectomy?
>
> A: No, because it would have entailed a second major surgery that
> would be invasive. As I mentioned, resecting entails the opening
> up of the chest of the patient.>°
>
> Negligence was not the proximate cause of Quintin’s death. Proximate
> cause is that which, in a natural and continuous sequence, unbroken by any
> efficient intervening cause, produces injury, without which the result would
> not have occurred. An injury or damage is proximately caused by an act or a
> failure to act whenever it appears from the evidence in the case that the act or
> omission played a substantiat part in bringing about or actually causing the
> injury or damage and that the injury or damage was either a direct result or a
> reasonably probable consequence of the act or omission.”
>
> 34 Id. at 208-219.
> 35 Jd, at 213-216.
> 56 Cayao-Lasam y. Spouses Ramoleté, 595 Phil. 56, 77 (2008) {Per J. Austria-Martinez, Third Division].
>
>
> Decision
>
> The expert witnesses, Dr. Tuazon and Dr. Figueroa, testified that the
> stroke experienced by Quintin, which led to his death, was one of the inherent
> risks involved in a stenting procedure. To be sure, Quintin would have hada «.
> stroke regardless of whether the device was successfully deployed on him or
>
> 13 G.R. No. 268308
>
> not. Dr. Figueroa further testified:
>
> 37
>
> Q:
>
> You also identified and confirmed what are the risks of [stenting]
> which included bleeding, stroke[,] and death. In this case, the patient
> Quintin Que underwent endovascular stenting and he also died. What
> is the relationship of the endovascular stenting performed on the
> patient and on the fact of his death?
>
> Let me just say that Mr. Que did not die from the stenting per se
> directo. Mr. Que died from complications that emanated during the
> procedure in the process of doing the endovascular stenting, Ma’am.
> There are manipulations that have to concur using the catheter that is
> introduced into the aorta. The aneurysm of Mr. Que is located beyond
> the branch going to the left arm but the catheter needed to be
> introduced more proximal io that and these catheters are meant to
> guide the deploying [device] by which the stent device can be
> deployed. In the process of manipulation of the catheter, I believe that
> is when cholesterol clots above the aneurysm were dislodged and this
> is not uncommon in procedure, even in catheterization it happened.
> When the cholesterol clots dislodged [sic] inadvertently, it can go
> anywhere and unfortunately, the tendency can go to the brain. That’s
> how Mr. Que developed and sustained cerebrovascular infarction
> during the procedure. It is not the stent that caused the clot. It is the
> manipulation of the catheter that is required so that the stent can be
> deployed, Ma’am.
>
> Had the stent been successfully deployed by Dr. Verhoeven, was there
> a risk of the [sic] cardiopulmonary failure on the part of Mr. Quintin
> Que?
>
> To be more frank with him, Mr. Quintin Que would have had
> cerebrovascular accident even though the stent was deployed properly
> because there are two different phenomena and the CVA was caused
> by the catheter and we have said that I have [a] patient who had
> coronary bypass surgery and the coronary bypass surgery is
> performed to prevent heart attack but in spite of the fact that the
> coronary bypass surgery that I performed was successful, the patient
> still have [sic] heart attack, Ma’am. Those are the risks of the
> proceedings that we tried to avoid, but we cannot totally prevent. We
> can minimize them, and that is [what] we tried to do but we cannot do
> 100% success, Ma’am.
>
> COURT:
>
> Q:
>
> A: Yes, your Honor.
>
> On the other hand, Elpidio failed to present expert witness to refute Dr.
> Tuazon’s and Dr. Figueroa’s statements. As a forensic pathologist, Dr. Fortun
>
> Rollo, pp. 141-142.
>
> preva
>
> Including the stenting.
> 57
>
>
> Decision 14 G.R. No. 268308
>
> cannot qualify as an expert witness in so far as to determine whether Dr.
> Aventura exercised the norm observed by other reasonably competent
> members of the profession. The expert witness must be a similarly trained and
> experienced physician.°® Thus, we declared in Ramos v. Court of Appeals”
> that a pulmonologist is not qualified to testify as to the standard of care
> required of an anesthesiologist.© In Reyes v. Sisters of Mercy Hospital,®' we
> ruled that an autopsy expert is not qualified to testify as a specialist in
> infectious diseases. Therefore, the preponderance of evidence tilts in favor
> of respondents.
>
> As to Dr. Verhoeven’s authority to operate on Quintin, Section 5 of
> Presidential Decree No. 673, the PHC allows the hospital to “invite foreign
> heart specialists and similar experts in the various medical fields to train the
> personnel or trainees or residents of the [PHC].” Dr. Ludgerio D. Torres,
> former director of the PHC, issued a Certification™ dated January 25, 2013,
> listing Dr. Verhoeven as one of the experts in his field to have operated in the
> PHC.
>
> Moreover, the doctrine of res ipsa loquitor, translated as “the thing
> speaks for itself,’ does not apply in this case. The doctrine requires the
> concurrence of the following elements: (1) the accident was of a kind that does
> not ordinarily occur unless someone is negligent; (2) the instrumentality or
> agency which caused the injury was under the exclusive control of the person
> charged with negligence; and (3) the injury suffered must not have been due
> to any voluntary action or contribution from the injured person.” The cause
> of Quintin’s death was not due to the negligence of Dr. Aventura but was due
> to one of the inherent risks of the stenting procedure.
>
> Finally, we cannot subscribe to Elpidio’s claim that the “faulty” stent
> hastened the death of his father. Bare allegations are not proof. The trial court
> noted that other than the testimonies of Elpidio and his sister, Elisa Que, the
> records do not show how faulty the stent used on Quintin was.
>
> Ultimately, the CA did not commit an error in affirming the dismissal
> of the Complaint for Damages for lack of merit.
>
> ACCORDINGLY, the Petition for Review on Certiorari is DENIED.
> The Decision dated July 3, 2023 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CV No.
> 115245 that affirmed the dismissal of Elpidio Que’s Complaint STANDS.
>
> Borromeo v. Familv Care Hospital, Inc., 779 Pil. 1, 13 (2016) [Per J. Brion, Second Division].
> 99 378 Phil. 1198 (1999) |Per J. Kapunan, First Division}.
>
> 60 Id. at 1236.
>
> 61 396 Phil. 87 (2000) [Per J. Mendoza, Secone Division].
>
> 62 Id. at 100-101.
>
> 6 Rolio, p. 397.
>
> 6 Child Learning Center Inc. v. Tagario, 512 Phil. 618, 625 (2005) [Per J. Azcuna, First Division].
>
> i
>
>
> Decision 15 G.R. No. 268308
>
> SO ORDERED.
>
> ,
> .
>
> WE CONCUR: Wis
>
> MAR : /F. LEON
> Senior Associate Justice
>
> AMY C. LAZARO-JAVIER mos ones
> Associate Justice Associate Justice
>
> ROE
> TONIO T. KHO, JR:
>
> Associate Justice
>
> ATFTESTATION
>
> I attest that the conclusions in the above Decision had been reached in
> consultation before the case was assigned to the writer of the opinion of the
> Court’s Division.
>
> MARVIC-M.VF.
> Senior Associate Justice
> Chairperson, Second Division
>
> CERTIFICATION
>
> Pursuant to Article VIU, Section 13 of the Constitution, and the
> Division Chairperson’s Attestation, I certify that the conclusions in the above
> Decision had beet reached in consultation before the case was assigned to the
> writer of the opinion of the Cuurt’s Division.
>
> BB C.. GESMUNDO
> ref Justice
>
> han
>
>
> SECOND DIVISION
>
> G.R. No. 268308 — ELPIDIO QUE, Petitioner, v. PHILIPPINE HEART °
> CENTER, DR. AVELINO P. AVENTURA, and FIRST ASSOCIATED
> MEDICAL DISTRIBUTION CO., INC., Respondents. ,
>
> Promulgated:
>
> APR 0 22025
>
> CONCURRING OPINION
>
> LEONEN, J.:
>
> I agree with the ponente that respondent Dr. Avelino P. Aventura (Dr.
> Aventura) was not negligent in his duty as the attending physician of Quintin °
> Que (Quintin), the father of petitioner Elpidio Que. However, I clarify the
> doctrine regarding medical malpractice cases involving foreign specialist
> doctors and specialist hospitals and the doctrine of informed consent.
>
> In a medical malpractice case, the plaintiff must prove the following
> elements with a preponderance of evidence:
>
> Whoever alleges a fact has the burden of proving it. This is a basic
> legal principle that equally applies to civil and criminal cases. In a medical
> malpractice case, the plaintiff has the duty of proving its elements, namely:
> (1) a chity of the defendant to his patient; (2) the defendant’s breach of this
> duty; (3) injury to the patient; and (4) proximate causation between the
> breach and the injury suffered. In civil cases, the plaintiff must prove these
> elements by a preponderance of evidence.' (Emphasis in the original,
> citation omitted)
>
> The duty of a medical professional is to observe the “standard of care
> and exercise the degree of skill, knowledge, and training ordinarily expected
> of other similarly trained medical professionals acting under the same
> circumstance.’” In some cases, it is described as the “norm observed by other
> reasonably competent members of the profession practicing the same field of
> medicine.’? Expert testimony is usually needed to establish this standard of
> care: .
>
> ' Borromeo v. Family Care Hospital, tnc., 779 Phil. 1, 12 (2016) [Per J. Brion, Second Division].
> 2 Id. at 12--13.
> Md at 13.
>
>
> Concurring Opinion 2 G.R. No. 268308
>
> A medical professional has the duty to observe the standard of care
> and exercise the degree of skill, knowledge, and training ordinarily expected
> of other similarly trained medical professionals acting under the same
> circumstances. A breach of the accepted standard of care constitutes
> negligence or malpractice and renders the defendant liable for the resulting
> injury to his patient.
>
> The standard is based on the norm observed by other reasonably
> competent members of the profession practicing the same field of medicine.
> Because medical malpractice cases are often highly technical, expert
> testimony is usually essential to establish: (1) the standard of care that the
> defendant was bound to observe under the circumstances; (2) that the
> defendant's conduct fell below the acceptable standard; and (3) that the
> defendant's failure to observe the industry standard caused injury to his
> patient.
>
> The expert witness must be a similarly trained and experienced
> physician. Thus, a pulmonologist is not qualified to testify as to the standard
> of care required of an anesthesiologist and an autopsy expert is not qualified
> to testify as a specialist in infectious diseases.4 (Emphasis supplied,
> citations omitted) ;
>
> When assessing the required standard of care for physicians, the
> circumstance of a hospital being classified as a specialist must be considered.
> Since a specialist hospital offers highly specialized medical services, the
> standard of care expected from the specialists ought to be higher and measured
> against those they are similarly situated with.
>
> In this case, the Philippine Heart Center is a specialist hospital. It was
> created in recognition of the need for specialized medical services for those
> suffering from heart and allied diseases in the Philippines.* Thus, the standard
> of care required at present should be based on the testimony of expert
> witnesses learned in the same specialties.
>
> The legal duty to perform the required standard of care is created once
> a physician-patient relationship is established:
>
> A physician-patient relationship is created when a patient engages
> the services of a physician, and the latter accepts or agrees to provide care
> to the patient. The establishment of this relationship is consensual, and the
> acceptance by the physician essential. The mere fact that an individual
> approaches a physician and seeks diagnosis, advice or treatment does not
> create the duty of care unless the physician agrees.
>
> The consent needed to create the relationship does not always need
> to be express. In the absence of an express agreement, a physician-patient
> relationship may be implied from the physician’s affirmative action to
> diagnose and/or treat a patient, or in his participation in such diagnosis
> and/or treatment. The usual illustration would be the case of a patient who
>
> 4 7d. at 12-13.
> ‘Presidential Decree No. 673 (1975), Creating the Philippine Heart Center for Asia.
>
>
> Concurring Opinion 3 G.R. No. 268308
>
> goes to a hospital or a clinic, and is examined and treated by the doctor. In
> this case, we can infer, based on the established and customary practice in
> the medical community that a patient-physician relationship exists.
>
> Once a physician-patient relationship is established, the legal duty
> of care follows. The doctor accordingly becomes duty-bound to use at least
> the same standard of care that a reasonably competent doctor would use to
> treat a medical condition under similar circumstances.
>
> Breach of duty occurs when the doctor fails to comply with, or
> improperly performs his duties under professional standards. This
> determination is both factual and legal, and is specific to each individual
> case.® (Citations omitted)
>
> This duty to observe the required standard of care continues even after
> an attending physician recommends a foreign specialist doctor to a patient for
> the performance of a_ specialized procedure. The physician-patient
> relationship between the attending physician and the patient still exists if the
> patient continues to rely on the attending physician’s expertise.
>
> The attending physician—as the one who diagnosed the patient,
> suggested the course of treatment, and recommended the foreign specialist
> doctor who will perform the treatment—cannot simply assert that they are not
> liable for the result of the procedure performed by the foreign specialist. If it
> is proven that the foreign specialist doctor acted with negligence, then the
> burden is on the recommending doctor to prove that he acted with the required
> standard of care under the circumstances, else he will be held liable.
>
> Thus, the attending physician must make an individual assessment of
> the patient’s case. Their responsibility is not only limited to disclosing all the
> relevant information on the recommended procedure, but there should also be
> a. showing that the doctor has done all that can be reasonably required to
> mitigate the risks in the performance of the specialized procedure.
>
> Based on the records, Quintin was diagnosed with coronary artery
> disease in three major vessels of his heart and an aneurysm of the thoracic
> aorta. Dr. Aventura’s assessment was that Quintin was in a critical stage since
> his three major vessels were 70% blocked.’ Because of this, Quintin was
> advised to undergo an “open-method surgery” since the vessels “could burst
> anytime.”® Given that the coronary artery disease was determined to be more
> life-threatening, on June 20, 1999, Dr. Aventura and the team performed a
> three-vessel coronary aorta bypass surgery on Quintin at the Philippine Heart
> Center.? Dr. Aventura advised Quintin to come back a month after the triple
>
> © — Casumpung vy. Cortejo, 755 Phil. 466. 485-486 (2015) [Per J. Brion, Second Division].
> 7 Rollo, p. V12.
>
> 8 Id. at 998.
>
> 2 Id. a 933.
>
>
> Concurring Opinion 4 | G.R. No. 268308
>
> bypass surgery for the treatment of the aneurysm. However, Quintin came
> back three months later.!°
>
> It was then discovered that the aneurysm had rapidly grown, and that
> the treatment needed to be immediate since it could “rupture anytime and
> result to death.”'' After being presented with all the options, Quintin and his
> family decided to proceed with the endovascular stenting procedure. '?
>
> On February 14, 2000, the procedure was performed by Dr. Eric
> Verhoeven. As the attending physician, Dr. Aventura was present while it was
> being performed. However, the endovascular stenting procedure failed.
> Quintin suffered a stroke and eventually passed away on February 27, 2000.'°
> His cause of death was found to be cerebral infarction, and the antecedent
> cause was due to cerebrovascular thromboembolism. '*
>
> Throughout this process, Dr. Aventura not only provided all the
> relevant information and recommended the best course of treatment, but he
> was also present to supervise the stenting procedure and all the events leading
> up to it.
>
> Quintin was 74 years old and had comorbidities during his diagnosis."
>
> Based on this and on the fact that the aneurysm grew rapidly, Dr. Aventura
> informed Quintin and his family of all the available options, the nature of the
> procedures, and the risks involved in undertaking the procedure:'°
> (1) aneurysmectomy, which has higher risks and mortality since it will require
> opening his chest again;'? and (2) endovascular stent procedure, which has
> lesser risks since it is a less invasive procedure that requires an “incision of an
> artery in the groin where a catheter carrying the stent will be inserted.”'® He
> presented endovascular stenting as a new and promising development in
> medical science based on articles and literature. Although it was not yet being
> done in the Philippines, the procedure was already commonly done in other
> countries.'? Dr. Aventura also informed Quintin that since he is not a specialist
> in stent procedure, a foreign specialist would perform it.”°
>
> In preparation for the procedure, Quintin also underwent several tests,
> such as a CT scan, angiogram, and aortogram.”' Dr. Aventura gave the
> measurement of the aorta to First Associated Medical Distribution Co., Inc.
>
> 10 Id. a 999.
> Ud.
>
> 3 Id. at 1000.
>
> Mo dd at 118.
>
> 5 Id. at 961-962.
> 10 Id. at 1005.
>
> 17 te. at 114, 999.
> 8 Id. at 106, 999.
> 19 Id. at 963.
>
> 20 Id. at 1005.
>
> 21 Id. at 999.
>
>
> Concurring Opinion 5 G.R. No. 268308
>
> and eventually to the product specialist Medtronic International Limited of
> Singapore for the stenting device. During the endovascular stent procedure,
> Dr. Aventura was there as the attending physician.””
>
> Dr. Edgar S. Tuazon and Dr. Peter R. Figueroa, specialists in
> cardiovascular and endovascular surgery, testified that based on Quintin’s
> medical records, they would recommend stenting rather than open repair,
> taking into account Quintin’s advanced age, pre-existing pulmonary disease,
> and recent history of bypass surgery.”> They also testified that a stroke was
> one of the inherent risks involved in the stenting procedure.** According to
> them, if Quintin did not consent to endovascular stenting, the aneurysm is like
> a “time bomb” that can rupture anytime and would lead to his death.”
>
> Based on these circumstances, Dr. Aventura, as the attending physician,
> has performed the standard of care required from a cardiothoracic surgeon as
> established by expert testimony.
>
> A physician also has the duty to disclose the material risks of a
> procedure based on the doctrine of informed consent.”° In Dr. Li v. Spouses
> Soliman,”’ physicians may be held liable when they fail to obtain an informed
> consent of the patient before performing any medical procedure:
>
> Reiterating the foregoing considerations, Cobbs v. Grant deemed it
> as integral part of physician’s overall obligation to patient, the duty of
> reasonable disclosure of available choices with respect to proposed therapy
> and of dangers inherently and potentially involved in each. However, the
> physician is not obliged to discuss relatively minor risks inherent in
> common procedures when it is common knowledge that such risks inherent
> in procedure of very low incidence. Cited as exceptions to the rule that the
> patient should not be denied the opportunity to weigh the risks of surgery or
> treatment are emergency cases where it is evident he cannot evaluate data,
> and where the patient is a child or incompetent. The court thus concluded
> that the patient's right of self-decision can only be effectively exercised if
> the patient possesses adequate information to enable him in making an
> intelligent choice. The scope of the physician’s communications to the
> patient, then must be measured by the patient’s need, and that need is
> whatever information is material to the decision. The test therefore for
> determining whether a potential peril must be divulged is its materiality to
> the patient's decision.
>
> Cobbs v. Grant further reiterated the pronouncement in Canterbury
> v. Spence that for liability of the physician for failure to inform patient, there
> must be causal relationship between physician’s failure to inform and the
> injury to patient and such connection arises only if it is established that, had
> revelation been made, consent to treatment would not have been given.
>
> = fd. at 1005.
>
> 23 Id. at 1007-1008.
>
> 24 Id. at 142.
>
> 24 ld.
>
> 6 Liv. Spouses Soliman, 666 Phil. 29, 57 (2011) [Per J. Villarama, Jr., En Banc].
> "666 Phil. 29 (2011) [Per J. Villarama, Jr. Fn Banc}.
>
> tL
>
>
> Concurring Opinion 6 G.R. No. 268308
>
> There are four essential elements a plaintiff must prove in a
> malpractice action based upon the doctrine of informed consent: “(1) the
> physician had a duty to disclose material risks; (2) he failed to disclose or
> inadequately disclosed those risks; (3) as a direct and proximate result of
> the failure to disclose, the patient consented to treatment she otherwise
> would not have consented to; and (4) plaintiff was injured by the proposed
> treatment.” The gravamen in an informed consent case requires the plaintiff
> lo “point to significant undisclosed information relating to the treatment
> which would have altered her decision to undergo it.”
>
> The element of ethical duty to disclose material risks in the proposed
> medical treatment cannot thus be reduced to one simplistic formula
> applicable in all instances. Further, in a medical malpractice action based
> on lack of informed consent, “the plaintiff must prove both the duty and the
> breach of that duty through expert testimony.[”] Such expert testimony
> must show the customary standard of care of physicians in the same practice
> as that of the defendant doctor.2® (Citations omitted)
>
> The main inquiry in an informed consent case is whether there is
> significant undisclosed information regarding the treatment that would have
> altered the patient’s decision to undergo it.””
>
> In medical malpractice cases based on the doctrine of informed consent,
> a plaintiff must prove: “(1) the physician had a duty to disclose material risks;
> (2) he failed to disclose or inadequately disclosed those risks; (3) as a direct
> and proximate result of the failure to disclose, the patient consented to
> treatment she otherwise would not have consented to; and (4) plaintiff was
> injured by the proposed treatment.”2° To ensure that the nature of the
> procedure and its associated risks are clearly communicated to the patient,
> consent forms should indicate how this information was conveyed to the
> patient before it was signed.
>
> Here, the two consent forms signed by Quintin adequately showed the
> extent of information given to the patient before consenting to the
> endovascular stenting procedure.
>
> The first consent form, “Consent for Endovascular Stenting’?!
>
> describes the entirety of the endovascular stenting procedure. It further states:
>
> As expected in all invasive procedures, there are risks involved. But when
> your attending physician asks for a procedure like this[,] he has decided that
> the risks are far [outweighed] by the benefits of the information obtained
> through such procedure. If you have any further questions, you may discuss
>
> 28 Id. at 56-58.
> 29 Id. at 57.
>
> 30 ld.
> Rollo, p. 395.
>
> an
>
> A
>
>
> Concurring Opinion 7 G.R. No. 268308
>
> them with your attending physician or any member of the catheterization
> team who will perform the study.
>
> | have read and understood the foregoing. The nature and possible
> consequences have been explained to me.*? (Emphasis supplied)
>
> The second consent form, “Consent to Operation, Administration of
> Anesthesia, and the Rendering of Other Medical Services,”*? states in part:
>
> / attest that the procedure has been fully explained to me and I
> understand what will be done to me/above patient.*4 (Emphasis supplied)
>
> The records further support that Quintin and his family were
> sufficiently informed about the nature and risks of the endovascular stenting
> procedure.
>
> Petitioner admitted that respondent Dr. Aventura discussed the
> treatment options with the patient and his family.*> Petitioner and his family
> also narrated that they were informed that the stenting procedure has “fewer
> risks of hemorrhage or rupture of the aneurysm itself, and a smaller chance of
> paralysis” than the open surgery.°° Although the risks were described to be
> lesser, they still exist. Petitioner further testified that respondent Dr. Aventura
> presented medical literature about stents, displayed diagrams, and even
> sketched the device to illustrate how it functions when deployed.
>
> Aside from this, it is reasonable to expect that Quintin and his family
> are aware that trying a relatively new technology involves certain risks.
>
> Thus, petitioner failed to identify any undisclosed information
> regarding the endovascular stent procedure that could have influenced
> Quintin’s decision to proceed with it.
>
> FOR THESE REASONS, I vote to DENY the Petition.
>
> Senior Associate Justice
>
> 32 Id.
>
> 33 Jd. at 396.
> 3d.
>
> 3 Jd. at 1013.
> 56 Id. at 933.
