# GR-268839

**People Of The Philippines Vs. Aldrin Palacios y Fejedero Alias Anding And Noel Gaitan, Jr. y Bermundo**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: People Of The Philippines Vs. Aldrin Palacios y Fejedero Alias Anding And Noel Gaitan, Jr. y Bermundo
- **Ponente**: INTING, J.
- **Division**: THIRD DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: December 14, 2022
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/268839.pdf)

---

> l\epubltco f tbe ilbiltpptne~
> ~upremeQ l:ourt
> jffilanila
> THIRD DIVISION
> PEOPLE OF THE G.R. No. 268839
> PHILIPPINES,
> Plaintiff-appellee~ Present:
> CAGUIOA, J., Chairperson,
> INTING,
> GAERLAN,
> DIMAAMPAO, and
> - versus -
> SINGH,* JJ.
> ALDRIN PALACIOS y
> FEJEDERO alias "ANDING"
> and NOEL GAITAN, JR. y Promulgated:
> BERMUNDO,
> 'AlRJ ~t~ l'"•n2fi
> Accused-appellants.
> ~~
> x- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
> _GI::,« - - - - - - - - - - - -
> DECISION
> INTING, J.:
> Before the Court is an ordinary Appeal I filed by Aldrin Palacios
> y Fejedero alias "Anding" (Palacios) and Noel Gaitan, Jr. y Bermundo
> (Gaitan) ( collectively, accused-appellan~s) assailing the Decision2 dated
> December 14, 2022, of the Court of Appeals (CA) in CA-G.R. CR-HC
> • On leave.
> 1 Rollo, pp. 3-6. See Notice of Appeai dated January 4, 2023.
> 2 Id. at 8-39. Penned by Associare Justl.;;eF ernanda Lampas Peralta and concurred in by Associate
> Justices Rafael Antonio M. Santos and Lorenza R. Bordios of the Second Division, Court of
> Appeals, Manila.
>
> Decision 2 G.R. No. 268839
> No. 15614. The CA affinned the Consolidated Decision3 dated May 14,
> 2021, of Branch 84, Regional Trial Court (RTC), Batangas City in
> Criminal Case Nos. 21-27601, 21-27602, and 21-27603, which found
> accused-appellants guilty beyond reasonable doubt of violation of
> Sections 54 and 11,5 of Republic Act No. 9165,6 otherwise known as the
> "Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002."
> The Antecedents
> Accused-appellants were charged with the Illegal Sale and Illegal
> Possession of Dangerous Drugs in three separate Informations,7 the
> accusatory portions of which read:
> Criminal Case No. 21-27601
> That on or about the 4th day of January, 2021, at about 2:30
> o'clock in the morning, at Barangay Banay-banay 2nd Municipality of
> ,
> San Jose, Province of Batangas, Philippines and within the jurisdiction
> of this Honorable Court, the above-named accused, conspiring
> and confederating together, acting in common accord and mutually
> helping each other, without authority of law, did then and there
> willfully and unlawfully sell, deliver and give away to PSSg Ronald
> D. Punzalan, in exchange for a [PHP] 1,000.00 peso bill with serial
> no. FM401098 and eleven (11) pieces of [PHP] 1,000.00 boodle
> money, one (1) heat-sealed transparent plastic sachet containing
> methamphetamine hydrochloride commonly known as shabu,
> weighing 4.97 grams, referred to as Specimen "A-1" (RDPl with
> signature) in Chemistry Report No. BD-001-2021, a dangerous drug.
> Contrary to law. 8
> Criminal Case No. 21-27602
> That on or about the 4th day of January, 2021, at about 2:30
> [o'clock] in the morning, at Barangay Banay-banay 2nd Municipality
> ,
> Id. at 44-59. Penned by Presiding Judge Dorcas P. Ferriols-Perez.
> SECTION 5. Sale, Trading, Administrc11ion, Dispensation, Delivery, Distribution and
> Transportation of Dangerous Drugs and/or Controlled Precursors and Essential Chemicals. - ...
> SECTION 11. Possession of Dangerous Drugs. - ...
> 6 Titled, "AN ACT INSTITUTING THE COMPREHENSIVE DANGEROUS DRUGS ACT OF
> 2002, REPEALING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6425, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE
> DANGEROUS DRUGS ACT OF 1972, AS AMENDED, PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR,
> AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES." Approved on January 23, 2002.
> Rollo, p. 45; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27601), pp. 1-2; RTC records (Criminal Case
> No. 21-27602), pp. 1-2; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27603), pp. 1-2.
> RTC records (Crim ina l Case No. 21-2760 I), p. I.
>
> Decision G.R. No. 268839
> of San Jose, Province of Batangas, Philippines and within the
> jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the above-named accused, without
> authority of law, did then and there willfully and unlawfully have in his
> possession, custody[,] and control three (3) heat-sealed transparent
> plastic sachets, referred to as Specimen A2 ("RDP2 with signature"),
> Specimen A3 ("RDP3 with signature") and Specimen A4 ("RDP4 with
> signature") in Chemistry Report No. BD-001-2021, each containing
> methamphetamine hydrochloride commonly known as "shabu", having
> a total weight of 12.17 grams, a dangerous drug.
> Contrary to law.9
> Criminal Case No. 21-27603
> That on or about the 4th day of January, 2021, at about 2:30
> [o'clock] in the morning, at Barangay Banay-banay 2nd , Municipality
> of San Jose, Province of Batangas, Philippines and within the
> jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the above-named accused, without
> authority oflaw, did then and there willfully and unlawfully have in his
> possession, custody, and control three (3) heat-sealed transparent
> plastic sachets, referred to as Specimen Al ("FTP 1 with signature"),
> Specimen A2 ("FTP2 with signature") and Specimen A3 ("FTP3 with
> signature") in Chemistry Report No. BD-002-2021, each containing
> methamphetamine hydrochloride commonly known as "shabu", having
> a total weight of 6.31 grams, a dangerous drug.
> Contrary to law. 10
> Upon arraignment, accused-appellants entered pleas of "Not
> Guilty" to the crimes charged. 1 1
> Trial ensued.
> Version of the Prosecution
> On January 4, 2021, at around 12:10 a.m., the Drug Enforcement
> Team of the San Jose Municipal Police Station in San Jose, Batangas,
> received a report from a confidential informant (CI) that a certain
> individual known as "Anding," later identified as Palacios, was selling
> shabu in Barangay Banaybanay 2nd San Jose, Batangas. Acting on the
> ,
> 9 RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27602), p. 1.
> 10 RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27603 ), p. l.
> 11 Rollo, p. 17; RTC records (Criminal Case No.21-27601 ), p. 103, Certificate of A1nignment dated
> February 5, 2021; id. at 105-106, Consolidated Arraignment and Pre-Trial Order dated February
> 5, 2021.
>
> Decision 4 G.R. No. 268839
> report, Police Major Neil Christopher C. Gaspar (PMAJ Gaspar)
> organized a buy-bust operation and fonned a team composed of Police
> Staff Sargeant (PSSg) Ronald Punzalan (PSSg Punzalan), PSSg Ferdie T.
> Pedro (PSSg Pedro), PSSg Edwin Vivas (PSSg Vivas), PSSg Raffy Mitra
> (PSSg Mitra) and Patrolman Neil Silva (Pat. Silva).12
> Before proceeding, PMAJ Gaspar conducted a search of all police
> operatives to ensure that they were not carrying any unauthorized or
> illegal items.13 In preparation for the operation, PSSg Punzalan instructed
> the CI to contact Palacios and arrange the purchase of PHP 12,000.00
> worth of shabu. Palacios, during a phone conversation, agreed to meet the
> CI at around 2:30 a.m. on even date, at a waiting shed near the boundary
> of San Jose and Lipa City.14
> PSSg Punzalan then prepared one genuine PHP 1,000.00 bill with
> serial number FM401098, along with 11 pieces of fake PHP 1,000.00
> bills, to serve as marked money. In addition, he coordinated with media
> representative Lito Rendora (Rendora) and Barangay Councilor
> Richmond Val Ona (Ona), who agreed to meet the buy-bust team at
> the Barangay Hall of Barangay Banaybanay 2nd PSSg Abner Umali, Jr.
> (PSSg Umali) also coordinated with the Philippine Drug Enforcement
> Agency (PDEA) in Canlubang, Laguna, which subsequently issued
> Pre-Operation Clearance and Coordination Form with Control Number
> 10005-012021-0058. 15
> Upon arrival at the target area, PSSg Punzalan and the CI parked
> their motorcycle at the waiting shed, while the rest of the buy-bust team
> positioned their vehicles at a vacant lot approximately 20 meters away. At
> around 2:30 a.m., a silver van with Plate No. NDE 5139 stopped in front
> of PSSg Punzalan and the CI. As the van's door opened, a bald man
> appeared and waved at them. The CI identified the bald man as Palacios.16
> PSSg Punzalan and the CI then approached the van and saw four
> men on board. PSSg Punzalan handed the marked money to Palacios,
> who immediately placed it inside a blue-green sling bag. Palacios
> 12 Rollo, p. 9; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27601), p. 71, Sinumpaang Salaysay (Poseur
> Buyer) dated January 4, 2021, p. 7.
> 13 Rollo, id; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27601). id. at 71, Pictures of the Drug Enforcement
> Team during briefing.
> 14 Rollo, p. 9.
> 15 Id. RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27601 ), pp. 7-8, 35, Certificate of Coordination.
> 16 /d.atl0.
>
> Decision 5 G.R. No. 268839
> instructed one of his companions, later identified as Gaitan, stating:
> "Noel, akin na ang isang basura dyan para sa mga ito". In response,
> Gaitan retrieved a multi-colored pouch from his right pocket, from which
> he took one heat-sealed transparent plastic sachet containing a white
> crystalline substance. He gave the sachet to Palacios, who in tum handed
> it to PSSg Punzalan. Palacios further told PSSg Punzalan that they had
> more in stock should he need additional supply.17
> Upon receiving the suspected shabu, PSSg Punzalan placed the
> sachet in his pocket and executed the pre-arranged signal, i.e., he removed
> his cap, to inform the buy bust team that the sale had already been
> consummated. 18 Subsequently, he pulled Palacios out of the van and onto
> the sidewalk and introduced himself as a police officer. At the same time,
> PSSg Mitra blocked the van with his vehicle to prevent escape.19
> Simultaneously, PSSg Pedro instructed Gaitan to alight from the
> van and take out the contents of his pocket. Likewise, PSSg Mitra directed
> the driver, later identified as Romchel Javier y Banguirigan (Romchel), to
> step out of the van and lift his shirt up to ensure that he was not can-ying
> any weapon. While PSSg Vivas arrested the fourth suspect, John Patrick
> Javier y Gervacio (John) and conducted a body frisk for contraband or
> weapons.20
> The police operatives, after the arrest and incidental search on the
> person of the four suspects, recovered the following items:
> Arresting Recovered Items
> Officer: from: Recovered:
> PSSg Punzalan Palacios - The marked money
> - The sachet subject of the buy-
> bust
> - Three (3) heat-sealed plastic
> sachet containing white
> crystalline substance
> - Redmi blue cellphone
> - Blue green sling bag
> 17 Id. at 10-1 l.
> 18 Id. at 9.
> 19 Id at I l.
> 10 Id. at 12; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27601), pp. 9-10.
>
> Decision 6 G.R. No. 268839
> PSSg Pedro Gaitan - Three (3) heat-sealed plastic
> sachets containing white
> crystalline substance placed
> inside a Multicolored pouch
> PSSg Mitra Romchel - One (1) heat-sealed transparent
> plastic sachet containing white
> crystalline substance found
> inside one (1) Marlboro red
> cigarette pack
> PSSg Vivas John - One ( 1) heat-sealed transparent
> plastic sachet containing white
> crystalline substance found
> inside a maroon coin purse21
> Thereafter, the police operatives apprised them of their
> constitutional rights.
> At the place of arrest, PSSg Punzalan and PSSg Pedro immediately
> marked the seized items in the presence of accused-appellants, media
> representative Rendora and Barangay Councilor Ona.22 Specifically,
> PSSg Punzalan marked the items recovered from Palacios with his initials
> "RDP," to wit: (1) "RDPl"-the plastic sachet of suspected shabu
> purchased from Palacios; (2) "RDP2", "RDP3", and "RDP4"-the three
> plastic sachets of suspected shabu taken from the blue-green sling bag;
> (3) "RDPS"-the genuine PHP 1,000.00 bill; (4) "RDP6" to "RDP16"
> -the 11 pieces of fake PHP 1,000.00 bill; (5) "RDPl 7"-the blue-green
> sling bag; and "RDPl 8" - one Redmi cell phone. He likewise affixed his
> signature beside each marking. 23
> Similarly, PSSg Pedro marked the items seized from Gaitan with
> his initials "FTP," as follows: (1) "FTPl," "FTP2," and "FTP3"-the
> three plastic sachets of suspected shabu; and (2) FTP4-the multicolored
> pouch. He also placed his signature beside each marking.24
> Both PSSg Punzalan and PSSg Pedro conducted a separate
> inventory of the items that they respectively seized from accused-
> 21 Rollo, pp. 11-12.
> 22 Id. at 12-13.
> 23 Id. at 12; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27601), pp. 69-76, Pictures of the confiscated
> evidence from Palacios.
> 24 Rollo, pp. 12-13; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-2760 I), p. 78, Pictures of the confiscated
> evidence from Gaitan.
>
> Decision 7 G.R. No. 268839
> appellants which was signed by witnesses, Rendora and Ona. They also
> took photographs of the conduct of the marking and inventory. 25
> At around 3 :20 a.m., PSSg Punzalan and PSSg Pedro turned over
> the seized items to PSSg Umali, the investigating officer, who signed their
> respective chain of custody forms. By 4:30 a.m., the police operatives
> brought accused-appellants to the San Jose District Hospital for the
> conduct of a medical examination. Thereafter, at around 4:50 a.m., the
> police operatives brought accused-appellants to the San Jose Municipal
> Police Station. 26
> Subsequently, at about 8:35 a.m. of even date, PSSg Umali, after
> preparing the requests for laboratory examination and drug testing,
> brought accused-appellants to the Batangas Provincial Crime Laboratory
> Office. Between 9:10 a.m. to 9:20 a.m., PSSg Umali formally turned
> over the drug-related evidence to Police Master Sergeant Alvin Ligaya
> (PMSg Ligaya), as shown by the respective chain of custody form.27
> Immediately thereafter, PMSg Ligaya turned over the seized items
> to Forensic Chemist Camille Ocfemia (Ocfemia), who conducted
> a qualitative examination thereon.28 Per Chemistry Report No. BD-001-
> 2021 dated January 4, 2021, the four heat-sealed transparent plastic
> sachets containing white crystalline substance taken from Palacios, with
> markings "RDPl" to "RDP4", all yielded positive results for the presence
> of Methamphetamine Hydrochloride or shabu, a dangerous drug.
> Similarly, per Chemistry Report No. BD-002-2021 dated January 4, 2021,
> all three plastic sachets taken from Gaitan tested positive for shabu.29
> Version of the Defense
> Accused-appellants denied the charges filed against them. They
> narrated that Palacios had been approached by a certain Ricky, a distant
> relative, who allegedly promised to pay him the amount of PHP 20,000.00
> in exchange for delivering a package wrapped in masking tape to a person
> named "Kathleen." Before leaving, Palacios invited his friends-Gaitan,
> 25 Rollo, p.13
> 26 Id. at 14. RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-27601), p. 16, Sinumpaang Salaysay (Arresting
> Officer) dated January 4, 2021.
> 27 Rollo, p. 14.
> 2s Id.
> 29 Id.; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-2760 I), p. 119, Chemist1y Report No. BD-002-2021 dated
> January 4, 2021.
>
> Decision 8 G.R. No. 268839
> Jr., Romchel, and John-to accompany him. According to Gaitan, he did
> not inquire as to the contents of the package, as he was aware that Palacios
> had previously made similar deliveries.30
> Around 4:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on the same day, the group departed
> from Dasmarifias, Cavite, and arrived in Batangas City between 7 :00 p.m.
> to 8:00 p.m. Palacios received a call from Kathleen, who instructed him
> to wait for her at the Phoenix Gasoline station. Upon Kathleen's arrival,
> Palacios handed the package to her. Palacios narrated that immediately
> thereafter, the police operatives arrested him, ordered him not to run, and
> proceeded to blindfold him and his companions before transporting them
> to an unknown location.31
> While in custody, the police operatives asked if they were "using",
> to which they all answered in the negative. After a few hours, the police
> operatives brought accused-appellants to a nipa hut where the police
> operatives laid out sachets of illegal drugs on a table in front of them. The
> police operatives told them that the items would serve as evidence against
> them. After taking pictures of them, the police operatives brought them to
> the San Jose Municipal Police Station.32
> The Ruling of the RTC
> In the Consolidated Decision33 dated May 14, 2021, the RTC
> convicted accused-appellants of violation of Sections 5 and 11 of Republic
> Act No. 9165, viz.:
> WHEREFORE, premises considered, judgment 1s hereby
> rendered as follows:
> 1. In Criminal Case No. 21-27601, accused ALDRIN
> PALACIOS y Fejedero alias "Anding" and Noel Jr. Gaitan
> y Bermundo are both found GUILTY beyond reasonable
> doubt of violation of Section 5, Article II of [Republic Act
> No.] 9165 (sale of 4.97 grams of shabu), and they are
> hereby sentenced to each suffer the penalty of LIFE
> IMPRISONMENT and to each pay a fine of Five hundred
> thousand Pesos ([PHP] 500,000.00);
> 30 Rollo, p. 5 I.
> 31 Id.
> 32 Id. at 52.
> 33 Id. at 44-59.
> (Jl
>
> Decision 9 G.R. No. 268839
> 2. In Criminal Case No. 21--27602, accused ALDRIN
> PALACIOS y Fejedero alias "Anding" is found GUILTY
> beyond reasonable doubt of violation of Section 11,
> Paragraph 1, Article II of [Republic Act No.] 9165
> (possession of 12.17 grams of shabu), and he is hereby
> sentenced to suffer the penalty of LIFE IMPRISONMENT
> and to pay a fine of Five hundred thousand Pesos
> ([PHP] 500,000.00); and
> 3. In Criminal Case No. 21-27603, accused Noel Jr. Gaitan y
> Bermundo is found GUILTY beyond reasonable doubt of
> violation of Section 11, Paragraph 2, Article II of [Republic
> Act No.] 9165 (possession of 6.31 grams of shabu) and he
> is hereby sentenced to suffer the penalty of imprisonment
> of twenty (20) years and one (1) day, as minimum, to
> twenty-five (25) years, as maximum, and to pay a fine of
> Four hundred thousand Pesos ([PHP] 400,000.00).
> Accordingly, the bigger plastic sachet with markings "BD-001-
> 2021 CBO" and signature (Exhibit 'EE') containing the tape-sealed
> plastic sachet (Exhibit ·EE-1 ') with the four (4) heat-sealed plastic
> sachets with marking 'RDPl ', 'RDP2', 'RDP3', and 'RDP4', (Exhibits
> 'FF', 'GG', 'HH', and 'II'), the bigger plastic sachet with markings
> "BD-002-2021 CBO" and signature (Exhibit 'JJ') containing the tape
> sealed plastic sachet (Exhibit 'JJ-1 ') with the three (3) heat-sealed
> transparent plastic sachets with markings 'FTPl ', 'FTP2', and 'FTP3'
> (Exhibits 'KK', 'LL', and 'MM'), the blue green sling bag with
> markings 'RDPl 7' (Exhibit 'NN'), Redmi cell phone with markings
> 'RDP18' (Exhibit '00') and the multi-colored pouch with markings
> 'FTP4' (Exhibit 'PP') shall be immediately transmitted to the
> Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency (PDEA) for its proper disposal
> in accordance with law and pertinent regulations.
> As to the monies subject of the sale, particularly the one
> (I) piece of 1000 Peso bill with Serial No. FM401098 (Exhibit 'X'),
> the same is forfeited and confiscated in favor of the Government.
> Consequently, the Branch Clerk of Court is ORDERED to turn over to
> the Office of the Clerk of Court of the Regional Trial Court, upon
> proper receipt, the monies confiscated for proper deposit to the General
> Fund/Bureau of Treasury, in accordance with Section 20 of Republic
> Act No. 9165 and in compliance with OCA Circular No. 71-2017.
> SO ORDERED.34
> In conv1ctmg accused-appellants, the RTC found that the
> prosecution established, with moral ce1iainty, all the elements of Illegal
> Sale and Illegal Possession of shabu. It ruled that: first, the buy-bust
> 34 Id. at 58-59.
>
> Decision 10 G.R. No. 268839
> operation was legitimately conducted and accused-appellants were
> lawfully arrested; and second, the requirement that the mandatory
> witnesses must be present during the physical inventory and marking of
> the seized items was also duly complied with.35
> Aggrieved, accused-appellants appealed to the CA.36
> In their Brief,37 accused-appellants argued that they should be
> acquitted on the ground that the alleged sale of the seized shabu was not
> initiated by them but by the police operatives themselves. They averred
> that there was no valid entrapment; instead, they were victims of the police
> operatives' instigation.38
> The Ruling of the CA
> In the assailed Decision39 dated December 14, 2022, the CA found
> that accused-appellants were arrested as a result of a buy-bust operation,
> which is a fonn of entrap.ment recognized as a valid and effective mode
> of apprehending drug.pushers.40 It affirmed the RTC ruling in this wise:
> WHEREFORE, the trial court's Consolidated Decision dated
> May 14, 2021 convicting accused-appellants Aldrin Palacios [y]
> Fejedero and Noel Gaitan, Jr. y Bemrnndo of violation of Sections 5
> and 11, Article II, RA No. 9165, is affirmed.
> SO ORDERED.41
> Hence, the instant Appeal.42
> Both the Office of the Solicitor General, on behalf of the People,
> and accused-appellants manifested that they were adopting the contents of
> their respective Briefs filed before the CA in lieu of supplemental briefs.43
> 35 Id. at 53-57.
> 36 Id. at 25; RTC records (Crimimil Casi:' No. 21-27601), pp. 192-193. See Notice of Appeal dated
> May 17, 2021.
> 37 CA rollo, pp. 50-73. See Brief for the At:cused-Appellants dated July I I, 2022.
> 38 /d.at52-70.
> 39 Rollo, pp. 8-39.
> 40 Id. at 26.
> 41 Id. at 39.
> 42 CA rollo, pp. 173-175. See Notice of Appeal dated January 4, 2023.
> 43 Id. at 72-75, 66--67.
>
> Decision 1 1 G.R. No. 268839
> The Issue
> The issue for the Court's resolution is whether accused-appellants'
> guilt for violation of Sections 5 and 11 of Republic Act No. 9165 was
> proved beyond reasonable doubt.
> The Ruling of the Court
> The Appeal lacks merit.
> At the outset, it is well to stress that "an appeal opens an entire
> criminal case to review."44 Nonetheless, absent any showing that the
> factual findings of the RTC were arbitrarily issued or tainted with
> a reversible error, such findings are binding upon this Court, especially
> when affirmed by the CA.45
> After a careful review, the Court sees no cogent reason to overturn
> the factual findings and conclusions of the courts a quo that the
> prosecution successfully established all the elements of the Illegal Sale
> and Illegal Possession of dangerous drugs.
> For emphasis, Section 5 of Republic Act No. 9165 provides:
> SECTION 5. Sale, Trading, Administration, Dispensation, Delivery,
> Distribution and Transportation of Dangerous Drugs and/or
> Controlled Precursors and Essential Chemicals. - The penalty of life
> imprisonment to death and a fine ranging from Five hundred thousand
> pesos (PS00,000.00) to Ten million pesos (Pl 0,000,000.00) shall be
> imposed upon any person, who, unless authorized by law, shall sell,
> trade, administer, dispense, deliver, give away to another, distribute,
> dispatch in transit or transport any dangerous drug, including any and
> all species of opium poppy regardless of the quantity and purity
> involved, or shall act as a broker in any of such transactions.
> The penalty of imprisonment ranging from twelve (12) years and one
> (1) day to twenty (20) years and a fine ranging from One hundred
> 44 People v. lopina, 936 Phil. I 029, I 035 (2023); People v. Dapitan, G.R. No. 207518, November
> 24, 2021 [Notice]; People v. Dahil. 750 Phil. 212,225 (2015); People v. Balagat, 604 Phil. 529,
> 534 (2009); People v. Miranda, 560 Phil. 795, 805 (2007); People v. Jubail, 472 Phil. 527, 541-
> 542 (2004); People v. Saludes, 451 Phil. 719, 728 (2003); People v. Melendres, Jr., 450 Phil. 333,
> 352 (2003).
> 45 Pascua v. People, 941 Phil. 799, 805 (2023).
>
> Decision 12 G.R. No. 268839
> thousand pesos (Pl00,000.00) to Five hundred thousand pesos
> (P500,000.00) shall be imposed upon any person, who, unless
> authorized by law, shall sell, trade, administer, dispense, deliver,
> give away to another, distribute, dispatch in transit or transport any
> controlled precursor and essential chemical, or shall act as a broker in
> such transactions[.]
> Relatedly, Section 11o f the same law states:
> SECTION 11. Possession of Dangerous Drugs. - The penalty of life
> imprisonment to death and a fine ranging from Five hundred thousand
> pesos (P500,000.00) to Ten million pesos (Pl0,000,000.00) shall be
> imposed upon any person, who, unless authorized by law, shall possess
> any dangerous drug in the following quantities, regardless of the degree
> of purity thereof:
> (I) Life imprisomnent and a fine ranging from Four hundred thousand
> pesos (P400,000.00) to Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00), if
> the quantity of methamphetamine hydrochloride or "shabu" is ten
> (I 0) grams or more but less than fifty ( 50) grams;
> (2) Imprisonment of twenty (20) years and one (1) day to life
> imprisomnent and a fine ranging from Four hundred thousand
> pesos (P400,000.00) to Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00),
> if the quantities of dangerous drugs are five (5) grams or more but
> less than ten (10) grams of opium, morphine, heroin, cocaine or
> cocaine hydrochloride, marijuana resin or marijuana resin oil,
> methamphetamine hydrochloride or "shabu", or other dangerous drugs
> such as, but not limited to, MDMA or "ecstasy", PMA, TMA, LSD,
> GHB, and those similarly designed or newly introduced drugs and their
> derivatives, without having any therapeutic value or if the quantity
> possessed is far beyond therapeutic requirements; or three hundred
> (300) grams or more but less than five hundred (500) grams of
> marijuana; and
> (3) Imprisomnent of twelve (12) years and one (1) day to twenty
> (20) years and a fine ranging from Three hundred thousand pesos
> (P300,000.00) to Four hundred thousand pesos (P400,000.00), if the
> quantities of dangerous drugs are less than five (5) grams of opium,
> morphine, heroin, cocaine or cocaine hydrochloride, marijuana resin
> or marijuana resin oil, methamphetamine hydrochloride or "shabu", or
> other dangerous drugs such as, but not limited to, MDMA or "ecstasy",
> PMA, TMA, LSD, GHB, and those similarly designed or newly
> introduced drugs and their derivatives, without having any therapeutic
> value or if the quantity possessed is far beyond therapeutic
> requirements; or less than three hundred (300) grams of marijuana.
>
> Decision 13 G.R. No. 268839
> To secure a conviction for the Illegal Sale of dangerous drugs under
> Section 5 of Republic Act No. 9165, the prosecution must prove that the
> subject transaction actually took place.46 Thus, the following elements
> must concur: "(I) the identities of the buyer and seller, the object, and the
> consideration; and (2) the delivery of the thing sold and its payment."47
> "[T]he delivery of the illicit drug to the poseur-buy and the receipt by the
> seller of the marked money consummate the illegal transaction." 48
> Meanwhile, a successful prosecution of illegal possession of
> dangerous drugs under Section 11 of the same law, requires proof that:
> (1) the accused is in possession of an item or object, which is identified to
> be a prohibited or regulated drug; (2) such possession is not authorized by
> law; and (3) the accused freely and consciously possessed the drug.49
> In both the Illegal Sale and Illegal Possession of dangerous drugs,
> the contraband itself constitutes the very corpus delicti of the offenses.
> It is therefore essential to show that the substance recovered from accused
> appellants at the place of arrest is the very same substance presented in
> court. Otherwise, the accused must be acquitted on the ground of
> reasonable doubt. 50
> Notably, narcotic substances, such as shabu, are not readily
> identifiable and cannot be properly visually distinguished from other
> substances of the same physical or chemical appearance, making
> them "susceptible to alteration, tampering, contamination, substitution
> and exchange-whether the alteration, tampering, contamination,
> substitution, and exchange be inadvertent or otherwise not."51 To dispel
> any doubt as to the identity of the dangerous drugs, the prosecution must
> establish "an unbroken chain of its custody and must account for each link
> in its chain of custody, from the moment the drugs is seized up to its
> presentation in court as evidence" of the offense. "52
> 46 People v. Mendoza, 814 Phil. 31, 41 (2017); People v. Felipe, 663 Phil. 132, 142 (2011 ).
> 47 People v. Chen Junyue, 930 Phil. 291, 30 I (2022); People v. Dela Cruz, 869 Phil. 460,465 (2020).
> 48 People v. Meneses, 875 Phil. 724, 734 (2020).
> 49 People v. Paguinto, 933 Phil. 1056. 1064 (2023); People v. Quijano, 871 Phil. 547,558 (2020);
> People v. Manansala, 826 Phil. 578, 586 (2018); People v. Que, 824 Phil. 882 (2018); People v.
> Bio, 753 Phil. 730, 736 (20 I 5); People v. Morales, 630 Phil. 215, 228 (20 I 0); People v. Darisan,
> 597 Phil. 479,485 (2009); People v. Hajili, 447 Phil. 283,295 (2003); People v. Khor, 366 Phil.
> 762, 795 ( 1999).
> 50 People v. Paguinto, id. at I 065; citing People v. Carino, 845 Phil. 618, 623-624(2019); People v.
> Partoza, 605 Phil. 883, 891 (2009).
> 51 Calahi v. People, 820 Phil. 886, 894(2017).
> 52 People v. lopina, supra note 44, at I 038; People v. Gamboa, 833 Phil. 1055. 1066 (20 I 8); People
> v. Viterbo, 739 Phil. 593,601 (2014).
>
> Decision 14 G.R. No. 268839
> For this purpose, the following links must be established:
> 1. The seizure and marking, if practicable, of the illegal drug
> recovered from the accused by the apprehending officer;
> 2. The tum-over of the seized illegal drug to the investigating
> officer;
> 3. The tum-over by the investigating officer of the illegal drug
> to the forensic chemist for laboratory examination; and
> 4. The tum-over and submission of the illegal drug from the
> forensic chemist to the court.53
> Anent the Illegal Sale of dangerous drugs, the identities of the buyer
> and the seller, the object and the consideration are undisputed.
> PSSg Punzalan, the poseur buyer, positively identified accused-appellants
> as the same individuals they caught in flagrante delicto selling the shabu
> in exchange for PHP 12,000.00 in marked money during the buy-bust
> operation. Accused-appellants likewise admitted that, in exchange for
> money, they knowingly delivered an illegal package from Cavite to the
> buyer in Batangas, leading to their subsequent arrest by police operatives
> after the illegal transaction was consummated.
> This is clear from the testimony of Palacios, viz.:
> Q: You said a while ago that you were from Dasmarifias, Cavite,
> that's correct?
> A: Yes, Sir.
> Q: Why is it you said a while ago that you were arrested in
> Balayan, Batangas?
> A: I was just instructed, Sir.
> Q: You were instructed by whom?
> A: My distant relative, Sir.
> Q: What was the instruction all about?
> A: I was instructed to bring package, Sir.
> 53 People v. Hernandez, 923 Phil. 236, 242 (2022); People v. Sipin, 833 Phil. 67, 81 (2018); People
> v. Amaro, 786 Phil. 139, 148 (2016); People v. Enad, 780 Phil. 346, 358 (20 l 6); People v. Sapitula,
> 780 Phil. 848, 858 (20 l 6); People v. Mam mad, 769 Phil. 782, 790(2015); People v. Enriquez, 7 I 8
> Phil. 352, 366(2013); People v. Magpayo, 648 Phil. 641, 650 (20 l 0).
>
> Decision 15 G.R. No. 268839
> Q. A while ago you said you were instructed to deliver a package.
> To whom will you deliver the package?
> A: To a woman named Kathleen, Sir.
> Q: After you gave the package to this Kathleen, what happened
> next?
> A: And then, one policeman grabbed me, Sir.
> Q: How did you know that that person or that male person was
> a policeman?
> A: Because he said, "do net nm, we are policemen", Sir.
> Q: Did you inquire what was the content of that package?
> A: Yes, Ma'am.
> Q: And what was the answer?
> A: He told me to just deliver that and not to ask anymore, Ma'am.
> Q: Did he tell you that there is something in exchange of that
> package?
> A: Yes, Ma'am. That I should get the money, Ma'am.
> Q: And how much was that money?
> A: Around 100k, Ma'am.
> Q: With that huge amount of money, did you hesitate in going to
> Balayan, Batar1gas :md returning with [PHP] 117,000.00 having
> in exchange of that cigarette size package?
> A: I hesitated Ma'am, because I do not know the contents of that
> package.
> COURT TO WITNESS:
> Q: Has it ever entered your mind that the contents of that box were
> illegal?
> A: It came to my mind, your Honor.
> Q: So, why did you still deliver it?
> A: Becai.i:;el \Vil! t)e given big amo~mt of money, your Honor.
>
> Decision 16 G.R. No. 268839
> Q: So, you know for a fact that it would be illegal to deliver an
> illegal item and yet you still did it because of the big amow1t of
> money already promised to you?
> A: I already felt it, your Honor, because of the big amount of
> money. But I do not know, your Honor, as to what was the
> contents of that package.
> COURT:
> Q: But when you said that you already suspected that the contents
> are illegal, what were you thinking? What were the contents of
> that box?
> A: That maybe it's drugs, your Honor.
> Q: So, you are willing to deliver drugs to another person in
> exchange for a big amount?
> A: Yes, your Honor. Because the amount was big, your Honor[.]54
> Based on the above-admission, it is evident that accused-appellants
> freely and consciously possessed the dangerous drugs which were
> retrieved from their possession, after the police operatives conducted
> a search upon their persons following their arrest. PSSg Punzalan
> recovered three plastic sachets containing a total weight 12.17 grams of
> shabu together with the marked money in Palacios' blue green sling bag.
> Meanwhile, PSSg Pedro retrieved from Gaitan's coin purse another three
> plastic sachets containing a total weight of 6.31 grams of shabu. Further,
> accused-appellants' possession of the dangerous drugs was not authorized
> by law. Hence, all the elements of Illegal Possession of dangerous drugs
> are present. 55
> Grasping at straws, accused-appellants argue that the integrity of
> the seized items was not established with moral certainty because: 1) the
> required witnesses, although present, were strategically positioned about
> 20 meters away from the place where the shabu was purportedly sold,
> hence, they were not able to see up-close or hear the alleged illegal
> transaction; and 2) accused-•appellants were arrested around 2:30 a.m. but
> the seized items were only turned over to the investigator around 3 :20
> a.m., on even date.)- 6
> 54 TSN, Aldrin Palacios, April 26, 2021, pp. 6-7, 9, 21-22.
> 55 Rollo, pp. 24-25.
> 56 CA rollo, p. 69.
>
> Decision 17 G.R. No. 268839
> The arguments deserve scant consideration.
> Section 21 of Republic Act No. 9165, as amended by Republic Act
> No. I 0640, provides:
> SECTION 21. Custody and Disposition of Confiscated, Seized, and/or
> Surrendered Dangerous Drugs, Plant Sources of Dangerous
> Drugs, Controlled Precursors and Essential Chemicals,
> Instruments/Paraphernalia and/or Laboratory Equipment. - The
> PDEA shall take charge and have custody of all dangerous drugs ... so
> confiscated, seized and/or sunendered, for proper disposition in the
> following manner:
> (1) The apprehending team having initial custody and control
> of the dangerous drugs . . . shall, immediately after seizure and
> confiscation, conduct a physical inventory of the seized items and
> photograph the same in the presence of the accused or the persons from
> whom such items were confiscated and/or seized, or his/her
> representative or counsel, with an elected public official and a
> representative of the National Prosecution Service or the media who
> shall be required to sign the copies of the inventory and be given a copy
> thereof: Provided, That the physical inventory and photograph shall be
> conducted at the place where. the search wan-ant is served; or at the
> nearest police station or at the nearest office of the apprehending
> officer/team, whichever is practicable, in case of wanantless seizures:
> Provided, finally, That noncompliance of these requirements under
> justifiable grounds, as long as the integrity and the evidentiary value of
> the seized items are properly preserved by the apprehending
> officer/team, shall not render void and invalid such seizures and
> custody over said items.
> The Court upholds the findings of the lower courts that the State
> had preserved the integrity of the seized drugs.
> As to the first link in the chain of custody, the guidelines in Nisperos
> v. People,57 are instructive:
> 1. The marking of the seized dangerous drugs must be done:
> a. Immediately upon confiscation;
> b. At the place of confiscation; and
> c. In the presence of the offender (unless the offender eluded
> the an-est).
> 57 931 Phil. 945 (2022).
>
> Decision 18 G.R. No. 268839
> 2. The conduct of inventory and taking of photographs of the seized
> dangerous drugs must be done:
> a. Immediately after seizure and confiscation;
> b. In the presence of the accused, or the person/s from whom
> such items were confiscated and/or seized, or his/her
> representative or counsel; and
> c. Also in the presence of the insulating witnesses, as follows:
> 1. if the seizure occun-ed during the effectivity of R.A.
> No. 9165, or from July 4, 2002 until August 6, 2014,
> the presence of three (3) witnesses, namely, an
> elected public official; a Department of Justice
> (DOJ) representative; and a media representative;
> 11. if the seizure occun-ed after the effectivity of R.A.
> No. 10640, or from August 7, 2014 onward, the
> presence of two (2) witnesses, namely, an elected
> public official; and a National Prosecution Service
> representative or a media representative.
> 3. In case of any deviation from the foregoing, the prosecution must
> positively acknowledge the same and prove (1) justifiable ground/s
> for non-compliance and (2) the proper preservation of the integrity
> and evidentim)' value of the seized item/s. 58
> The records show that the police operatives, i.e., PSSg Punzalan
> and PSSg Pedro, immediately marked the items seized from accused
> appellants at the place of the arrest, using a masking tape and a marker, in
> the presence of accused-appellants, media representative Rendora, and
> Barangay Councilor Ona. Likewise, the inventory of the seized items,
> conducted by PSSg Punzalan and PSSg Pedro, was made in the presence
> of accused-appellants and thereafter signed by Rendora and Ona, as
> shown by the photographs, and as confirmed by the testimony of the
> police operatives.
> The pertinent testimony of PSSg Punzalan states:
> FISCAL ANDAYA:
> Q: In your salaysay, Mr. witness, you likewise mentioned that an
> inventory was likewise conducted. What is your proof that an
> inventory was conducted?
> 58 Id. at 956-957.
>
> Decision 19 G.R. No. 268839
> WITNESS
> A: I prepared a Ce11ificate of Inventory. I take note all the
> confiscated pieces of evidence coming from Aldrin Palacios @
> "Anding" and once I take note all the confiscated pieces of
> evidence, I signed it being the seizing officer and after that, I
> will give [it] to my witnesses for them to sign also and also [sic]
> to the two (2) suspects, Ma'am.
> Q: In your salaysay, you've mentioned that copies were given to
> the witnesses and to the suspects, what is your proof that copies
> of the Certificate oflnventory were given to them?
> A: Yes, Ma'am. I handed copies of the Ce11ificateo flnventory to
> the accused and to the two (2) witnesses, Ma'am.
> ACTING COURT INTERPRETER:
> Witness is being shown pictures marked as Exhibits "Z-3" to
> "Z-5"
> Q: Who are the persons being shown on that picture?
> A: I am the one seated putting the markings on the pieces of
> confiscated evidence, Ma'am. On my right side, on the van is
> Aldrin Palacios wearing brown polo shirt, beside him is Noel
> Gaitan and then Romciel and then John Patrick, Ma'am. Beside
> John Patrick, in front of the van is PSSG Vibas, PSSg Mitra,
> PSSg Pedro and our witness Media Representatives Lito
> Rendora and beside me is Konsehal Richn1ond Val Ona,
> Ma'an1.59
> Undoubtedly, the first link m the chain of custody was duly
> established by the prosecution.
> Besides, the case of Nisperos teaches us that the insulating
> witnesses "are not required to witness the arrest and the seizure or
> confiscation of the drugs or drug paraphernalia. They need only be
> readily available to witness the immediately ensuing inventory." 60 Thus,
> accused-appellant's contention that the witnesses were unable to actually
> see and/or hear the actual exchange of shabu because they were 20 meters
> away has no bearing on the requirements of the chain of custody rule.
> 59 TSN, PSSg Ronald Punzalan, March I I, 2021, pp. I 1-12, 14, 17-18.
> 60 See Nisperos v. People, supra note 57, at 953. (Emphasis supplied)
>
> Decision 20 G.R. No. 268839
> As to the second link, the Affidavit of the Investigator 61 and the
> Chain of Custody Forms62 show that PSSg Punzalan and PSSg Pedro
> turned over the seized items to the duty investigator, PSSg Umali.
> Accused-appellants, however, challenge the integrity and the
> evidentiary value of the seized items solely because they were turned over
> to the investigator at around 3 :20 a.m., or after a delay of more or less
> 50 minutes.
> Accused-appellants' argument is unmeritorious.
> During re-direct examination, PSSg Pedro sufficiently explained
> the five- to ten-minute delay in conducting the marking of the evidence
> that he recovered from Gaitan, to wit:
> Q: You mentioned that it took you 5 to 10 minutes for you to mark
> the evidence. So, why [did] it [take] you so long?
> A: Because PSSg Punzalan was still marking the evidence, for the
> items confiscated from Aldrin Palacios, Ma'am.
> Q: So, Punzalan made his markings on the specimen then after
> him, you marked the evidence confiscated from Noel Gaitan, is
> that correct?
> A: Yes, Ma'am.
> Q: So, you mentioned that Umali arrived while you were still on
> the process of markings. So, which evidence were being
> marked when Police Officer Umali arrived, if you can still
> remember?
> A: I cannot recall, Ma'am. Because we were many there at that
> time. We have four (4 ) persons arrested.
> Q: And how did you keep those items while they were not yet
> marked?
> A: I did not remove that from the multi color pouch, Ma'am.
> 61 RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-2760 I), pp. 29--32, Affidavit of Investigator dated January 4,
> 2021.
> 62 Id. at 38-39. Chain of Custody Fom1 dated January 4, 2021.
>
> Decision 21 G.R. No. 268839
> COURT:
> Ang tanong lang ay kung paano mo iningatan.
> WITNESS:
> A: Just in my possession, Ma'am. 63
> Considering that there were four suspects apprehended, and taking
> into account the number of items recovered from each suspect, the period
> of approximately 50 minutes before the seized items were turned over to
> the investigator is reasonable and does not constitute a break in the chain
> of custody.
> Anent the third and fourth links, the prosecution sufficiently
> established, based on the chain of custody forms both signed by PSSg
> Umali and PMSg Ligaya, that: (1) at around 8:35 a.m., PSSg Umali
> brought the seized items, as well as accused-appellants, to the Batangas
> Provincial Crime Laboratory Office; (2) PSSg Umali personally turned
> over the items seized from Palacios and Gaitan to PMSg Ligaya at "9: 10
> AM/04 JAN 2021" and "9:20 AM/04 JAN 2021", respectively; 64
> (3) PMSg Ligaya immediately turned over the seized items to forensic
> chemist Ocfemia; ( 4) Ocfemia conducted qualitative examination on the
> seized items, which tested positive for presence of Methamphetamine
> Hydrochloride; (5) Ocfemia resealed the seized items and gave it to the
> evidence custodian, PSSg Manalo; and (6) PSSg Manalo kept the seized
> items until they were submitted to the trial court, as shown by an
> Acknowledgement Receipt issued and signed by a court employee.65
> In People v. Cabuhay,66 the Court enumerated the following matters
> that must be included in the stipulations in cases where the parties opt to
> dispense with the attendance and testimony of the forensic chemist,
> namely: (1) that the forensic chemist received the seized article as marked,
> properly sealed, and intact; (2) that the forensic chemist resealed it after
> examination of the content; and (3) that forensic chemist placed his or her
> own marking on the same to ensure that it could not be tampered with
> pending trial. 67
> 63 TSN, PSSg Ferdie Pedro, April 15, 2021, pp. 13-15.
> 64 CA rollo, p. 35; RTC records (Criminal Case No. 21-2760 I), p. 29, Affidavit of Investigator dated
> January 4, 2021, p. 31.
> 65 Rollo, p. 36.
> 66 836 Phil. 903 (2018).
> 67 Id. at 918, citing People v. Pajarin, 654 Phil. 461,466 (2011).
>
> Decision 22 G.R. No. 268839
> Per the RTC Order68 dated February 18, 2021, the parties agreed to
> dispense with the testimony of Ocfemia and PSSg Manalo, and instead
> stipulated as follows:
> 6. That Police Captain Camille Bandelaria Ocfemia is . . . a
> Forensic Chemist, who is tasked to conduct examination on the
> specimen submitted to the said office;
> 7. That she is an expert Forensic Chemist witness:
> 8. That while on duty on January 4, 2021, she received from
> [PMSg Ligaya] the following:
> a. Request for Drug test and Request for Laboratory
> Examination (Aldrin Palacios) both dated January 4, 2021
> together with a tape sealed transparent plastic sachet with
> signature (on a masking tape) containing four heat-sealed
> transparent plastic sachet each containing white crystalline
> substance with markings (on a masking tape) 'RD Pl',
> 'RDP2', 'RDP3', and 'RDP4'; and
> b. Request for Drug test and Request for Laboratory
> Examination (Noel Gaitan Jr.) both dated January 4, 2021
> together with a tape sealed transparent plastic sachet with
> signature (on a masking tape) containing three heat-sealed
> transparent plastic sachet each containing white crystalline
> substance with markings (o n a masking tape) 'FTP 1' ,
> 'FTP2', and 'FTP3'
> 9. That after receipt of the said specimen, she conducted
> laboratory examination by taking representative sample of their
> contents;
> 10. That she placed her markings on each of the specimen she
> examined for her reference, Exhs. 'FF-1', 'GG-1', 'HH-1',
> 'II-1 ', 'KK-1 ', 'LL-1 ', and 'MM-1 ';
> 11. Thereafter, she placed:
> a. The tape sealed transparent plastic sachet with signature
> (on a masking tape) containing four heat-sealed transparent
> plastic sachets each containing white crystalline substance
> with markings (on a masking tape) 'RDPl ', 'RDP2',
> 'RDP3', and 'RDP4' inside a big transparent plastic sachet
> on which she placed her initial, signature and markings
> BD-001-2021; and
> 68 RTC record (Criminal Case No. 21-2760 I), pp. 121-127, Order dated February l 8, 2021.
>
> Decision 23 G.R. No. 268839
> b. the tape sealed transparent plastic sachet with signature
> (on a masking tape) containing three heat-sealed
> transparent plastic sachets each containing white crystalline
> substance with markings (on a masking tape) 'FTPI ',
> 'FTP2', and 'FTP3' inside a big transparent plastic sachet
> on which she placed her initial, signature and markings
> BD-002-2021;
> 12. That she reduced the results of her examination into writing
> which are Chemistry Reports No. BD-001-2021 and Chemistry
> Report No. BD-002-2021;
> 13. That as shown in the said Chemistry Reports, all the specimen
> gave positive results for the presence of methamphetamine
> Hydrochloride, a dangerous drug;
> 14. That she turned over the specimen subject matter of the
> Chemistry Reports together with the Chemistry Reports and
> Requests for Laboratory Examination to the evidence
> custodian, PSSg Manalo for safekeeping as evidenced by the
> Chain of Custody Form marked as Exh. 'CC' and Exh. 'DD';
> 16. That PSSg Isidro Manalo is . . . assigned at the Batangas
> Provincial Crime Laboratory Office;
> 17. That while on duty as evidence custodian ... , he received from
> [Ocfemia] the specimen subject matter of Chemistry Report
> No. BD-001-2021 placed inside a big transparent plastic sachet
> and the specimen subject matter of Chemistry Report No.
> BD-002-2021 placed inside a big transparent plastic sachet for
> safekeeping as evidenced by the Chain of Custody Forms
> marked as Exh. 'CC' and Exh. 'DD';
> 18. That the specimen subject of Chemistry Report No. BD-001-
> 2021, together with Chemistry Report No. BD-001-2021 and
> the corresponding Request for Laboratory Examination were
> placed inside the evidence room for safekeeping and were
> released only by him on February 9, 2021 to personally bring
> them before the Honorable Court as evidenced by Chain of
> Custody Form marked as Exh. 'CC' and were indeed received
> by Acknowledgement Receipt marked as Exh. 'AA' and Chain
> of Custody Form marked as Exh. 'CC';
> 19. That the specimen subject of Chemistry Report No. BD-002-
> 2021, together with Chemistry Report No. BD-002-2021 and
> the corresponding Request for Laboratory Examination were
> placed inside the evidence room for safekeeping and were
> released only by him on February 17, 2021 to personally bring
>
> Decision 24 G.R. No. 268839
> them before the Honorable Comi as evidenced by Chain of
> Custody Form marked as Exh. 'DD' and were indeed received
> by the Honorable Court on February 17, 2021 as evidenced by
> Acknowledgement Receipt marked as Exh 'BB' and Chain of
> Custody Form marked as Exh. 'DD'[.] 69
> To the Court's mind, the foregoing stipulations are sufficient,
> considering that they specifically state that when Ocfemia received the
> seized items, the same were intact, properly sealed, and more importantly,
> bore the markings placed by PSSg Punzalan and PSSg Pedro, i.e., 'RDPl ',
> 'RDP2' 'RDP3' and 'RDP4' and FTPl' 'FTP2' and 'FTP3'
> ' ' ' ' '
> respectively. Ocfemia likewise described how she conducted the
> laboratory examination, resealed the evidence, and affixed her own
> markings and signature on the seized items before turning them over to
> the evidence custodian, PSSg Manalo. The stipulations likewise cover
> where the evidence was kept after the forensic examination and how the
> evidence custodian, PSSg Manalo brought it to court.
> Given the foregoing, the Court finds no reason to deviate from the
> factual findings of the R TC, as affinned by the CA, as there is no
> indication that the lower courts had overlooked, misunderstood, or
> misapplied the surrounding facts and circumstances of the case. Besides,
> accused-appellants' bare denial deserves no weight in law, and cannot be
> accorded greater evidentiary value over clear, consistent, and credible
> testimony on affirmative matters, as in this case.70
> In closing, it bears stressing that noncompliance with Section 21 of
> Republic Act No. 9165 is excusable provided that there is a proffered
> justifiable ground and, more importantly, the integrity and evidentiary
> value of the seized items are still properly preserved. In the case, the
> reasons proffered by the police operatives sufficiently justifies any
> perceived irregularities during the turnover of the seized items from the
> apprehending officer to the investigating officer. The Court is likewise
> convinced that the movements and custodians of the seized items were
> duly established, and thus, the integrity of the seized items was
> maintained. 71
> 69 Id. at 124-126.
> 70 People v. Togon, Jr., 913 Phil. 5 I, 59 (2021); People v. Villanueva, 822 Phil. 735, 745 (2017);
> People v. Mateo, 582 Phil. 369, 384 (2008); People v. Gonzales, 417 Phil. 342, 353 (200 I).
> 71 People v. Deuz, G.R. No. 258440, October 11, 2023 [Notice], citing Nisperos v. People, supra note
> 57, at 955 (2022).
>
> Decision 25 G.R. No. 268839
> ACCORDINGLY, the Appeal is DISMISSED. The Decision
> dated December 14, 2022, of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. CR-HC
> No. 15614 is AFFIRMED in toto. Accused-appellants Aldrin Palacios y
> Fejedero alias "Anding" and Noel Gaitan, Jr. y Bermundo are found
> GUILTY beyond reasonable doubt of the Illegal Sale and Illegal
> Possession of dangerous drugs, defined and penalized under Sections 5
> and 11 of Republic Act No. 9165, otherwise known as the
> "Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002," in Criminal Case Nos.
> 21-27601, 21-27602, and 21-27603, filed before Branch 84, Regional
> Trial Court, Batangas City ..
> Accordingly, accused-appellants are SENTENCED to suffer the
> following penalties:
> 1. In Criminal Case No. 21-27601, accused-appellant Aldrin
> Palacios y Fejedero alias "Anding" and Noel Gaitan, Jr.
> y Bermundo are SENTENCED to each SUFFER the penalty
> of life imprisonment and to each PAY a fine of
> PHP 500,000.00;
> 2. In Criminal Case No. 21-27602, accused-appellant Aldrin
> Palacios y Fejedero alias "Anding" is SENTENCED to
> suffer the penalty of life imprisonment and to PAY a fine of
> PHP 500,000.00; and
> 3. In Criminal Case No. 21-27603, accused-appellant Noel
> Gaitan, Jr. y' Bermundo is SENTENCED to suffer the
> penalty of imprisonment of 20 years and one day, as
> minimum, to 25 years, as maximum, and to pay a fine of PHP
> 400,000.00.
> SO ORDERED.
> HEN
>
> Decision 26 G.R. No. 268839
> WE CONCUR:
> NS. CAGUIOA
> stice
> (On leave)
> MARIA FILOMENA D. SINGH
> Associate Justice
> ATTESTATION
> I attest that the conclusions in the above Decision had been reached
> in consultation before the case was assi • ed to e writer of the opinion
> of the Court's Division.
> MINS. CAGUIOA
> sso ia e Justice
> Chairperson, Third Division
>
> Decision 27 G.R. No. 268839
> CERTIFICATION
> Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 13 of the Constitution and the
> Division Chairperson's Attestation, I certify that the conclusions in the
> above Decision had been reached in consultation before the case was
> assigned to the writer of the opinion of the Court's Division.
