# GR-272507

**Department of Education, represented by Dr. Estela  Carino, in her capacity as OIC- Regional Director of Region II vs. Princess Joama Marcosa A. Caleda**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: Department of Education, represented by Dr. Estela  Carino, in her capacity as OIC- Regional Director of Region II vs. Princess Joama Marcosa A. Caleda
- **Ponente**: LEONEN, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: March 11, 2016
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/09/G.R.-272507-2025-04-21-DECISION.pdf)

---

> Republic of the Philippines
> Supreme Court
> Baguio City
>
> SECOND DIVISION
>
> DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, G.R. No. 272507
> represented by DR. ESTELA
> CARINO, in her capacity as OIC-
> Regional Director of Region IT,
> Petitioner, Present:
>
> LEONEN, J., Chairperson,
> LAZARO-JAVIER,
>
> - Versus - LOPEZ, M.,
> LOPEZ, J., and
> KHO, JR., A.
>
> PRINCESS JOAMA MARCOSA A.
>
> CALEDA,
>
> Respondent.
> x ee er ee ee we we eww ww ww aw oe wo en ee we ee
> DECISION
> LEONEN, J.:
>
> A public institution with the power of eminent domain may not be
> ejected from a property devoted to public use, even without a title, if there is
> an express or implied acquiescence—in the form of delay in asserting rights—
> from the owner of the property.! Conversely, a public institution may be
> ordered to vacate a property devoted to public use if it is shown that the owner
> did not consent to the occupation and that the owner has a better right of
> possession.
>
> National Transmission Corporation v. Bermuda, 851 Phil. 38 (2019) [Per J. Caguioa, Second Division];
> Republic v. Mendoza, 64) Phil. 562 (2010) [Per J. Abad, Second Division]; Manila Railroad Company
> v. Paredes, 32 Phil. 534, 537 (1915) [Per J. Trent, En Banc]; Eversley Childs Sanitarium v. Spouses
> Barbarona, 829 Phil. 111 (2018) [Per J. Leonen, Third Division].
>
>
> Decision 2 G.R. No. 272507
>
> This Court resolves the Petition for Review on Certiorari? under Rule
> 45 of the Rules of Court assailing the Court of Appeals Decision? and
> Resolution,* which affirmed the Regional Trial Court and the Municipal
> Circuit Trial Court rulings ordering the Department of Education (DepEd) to
> vacate Lot No. 4721 and to peacefully turn over its possession to Princess
> Joama Marcosa A. Caleda (Caleda).
>
> On March 11, 2016, Caleda filed a Complaint? for Recovery of
> Possession with Damages before the Municipal Circuit Trial Court of Solana,
> Cagayan. In her Complaint, Caleda alleged that she is the absolute owner of
> a 10,637-square meter rice land designated as Lot No. 7421, Cad-293, located
> in Brgy. Iraga, Solana, Cagayan with an assessed value of PHP 15,630.00.°
>
> Lot No. 7421 is a portion of a bigger parcel of land covered by Original
> Certificate of Title (OCT) No. 4975 registered in the name of the heirs of
> Bueno Gallebo.’ Beside Lot No. 7421 is Lot No. 7420 with an area of 14,966
> square meters, also covered by the same title.*
>
> Caleda claimed she bought Lot No. 7421 on November 21, 2014
> through an Extrajudicial Settlement of Estate with Waiver of Rights and Sale
> executed by the heirs of Bueno Gallebo in her favor.’ Caleda narrated that
> when she visited Lot No. 7421 for a relocation survey, she found it occupied
> by the Solana Fresh Water Fishery School (SFWFS) under the direct
> supervision of DepEd Regional Office 2.'°
>
> Caleda claimed she sent several demand letters for DepEd to vacate Lot
> No. 7421 but her request went unheeded. Thus, she filed a Complaint praying
> that DepEd be ordered to vacate Lot No. 7421 and to demolish the structures
> it has built on it."|
>
> In its Answer, DepEd claimed that SFWES is the owner of Lot No. 7421
> in fee simple and had been in an open, continuous, exclusive, and notorious
> possession of the lot since time immemorial.'* DepEd alleged that SFWFS
> bought the lot from Bueno Gallebo as evidenced by a July 7, 1965 Deed of
>
> ~
>
> Rollo, pp. 12-48.
>
> + Id. at 49-62. The September 27, 2023 Decision in CA-G.R. SP No. 172008 was penned by Associate
> Justice Roberto P. Quiroz and concurred in by Associate Justices Mariflor P. Punzalan Castillo and
> Germano Francisco D. Legaspi of the Second Division, Court of Appeals, Manila.
>
> 4 Id. at 63-64. The March 6, 2024 Resolution in CA-G.R. SP No. 172008 was penned by Associate Justice
> Roberto P. Quiroz and concurred in by Associate Justices Mariflor P. Punzalan Castillo and Germano
> Francisco D. Legaspi of the Former Second Division, Court of Appeals, Manila.
>
> * Id. at 89-91,
>
> & Id. at 89.
> 7 Id. at 50.
> 8 Id. at 138.
> ° Id. at 89.
> 10 Id. at 90.
>
> 2 Ide at 5h.
>
>
> Decision 3 G.R. No. 272507
>
> Sale. Since then, it has declared Lot No. 7421 for taxation purposes and built
> improvements thereon."?
>
> In its January 10, 2020 Decision,'* the Municipal Circuit Trial Court
> ruled in favor of Caleda and ordered DepEd to vacate Lot No. 7421 and to
> turn over its possession to Caleda. It found that Caleda had a better right to
> occupy Lot No. 7421 as she sufficiently proved her ownership through the
> Extrajudicial Settlement of Estate with Waiver of Rights and Sale executed
> by the heirs of Bueno Gallebo in her favor. The fact of sale, as well as the
> identity of the lot sold, was confirmed by Bueno Gallebo’s son Francisco, Jr.,
> who testified in support of Caleda."°
>
> It also found that the July 7, 1965 Deed of Sale between Bueno Gallebo
> and the Director of Vocational Schools (now SFWFS) actually covered Lot
> No. 7420. It held that even though SFWFS had been occupying Lot No. 7421
> for decades, its possession cannot ripen into ownership as registered lands
> cannot be claimed through acquisitive prescription."
>
> The dispositive portion of the Decision reads:
>
> WHEREFORE, foregoing premises considered, the Court finds that
> the evidence preponderates in [favor] of the plaintiff,
>
> Accordingly, defendant is hereby ordered to vacate Lot [No.] 7421
> described under Original Certificate of Title No. P-4975 and peacefully turn
> over its possession to plaintiff herein.
>
> SO ORDERED.!?
>
> In its November 5, 2021 Decision,'* the Regional Trial Court affirmed
> the Municipal Circuit Trial Court’s ruling. In distilling the issue as to who
> has a better right of ownership and possession over the subject lot, it ruled in
> favor of Caleda. It held that Lot No. 7421 remained unsold until Caleda
> bought it from Bueno Gallebo’s heirs on November 21, 2014."? It also held
> that SFWFS’s possession of Lot No. 7421 cannot ripen into ownership as,
> under the Torrens System, the title of the lot became incontrovertible one year
> after its registration.””
>
> {3 ld.
>
> Td. at 135-142. The January 10, 2020 Decision in Civil Case No. 1007 was penned by Judge Jesusa L.
> Carag of the Solana-Enrile Municipal Circuit Trial Court, Solana, Cagayan.
>
> S/d. at 139.
>
> 6 1d. at 141.
>
> 17 Td. at 142.
>
> 8 Id. at 145-147. The November 5, 2021 Decision in Civil Case No. 9035 was penned by Acting Presiding
> Judge Gemma P. Bucayu-Madrid of Branch 1, Regional Trial Court, Tuguegarao City.
>
> "9 Id. at 146.
>
> 20 ld.
>
>
> Decision 4 G.R. No. 272507
> The dispositive portion of the Decision states:
>
> WHEREFORE, finding no cogent reason to set aside the assailed
> Decision, the appeal is DENIED. The Decision rendered by the Court-a-
> quo on January 10, 2020 is AFFIRMED [i]n foto.
>
> SO DECIDED.?!
>
> In its September 27, 2023 Decision, the Court of Appeals affirmed the
> lower courts and held that Caleda had a better right to possess the property as
> she had clearly established her ownership of it.”
>
> The Court of Appeals found that the July 7, 1965 Deed of Sale only
> sold Lot No. 7420 to SFWFS, not the whole area covered by OCT No. P-
> 4975. As the property’s owner, Caleda is entitled to all the attributes of
> ownership, including possession. Further, Caleda’s ownership cannot be
> defeated by the adverse, open, and notorious possession of the property by
> SFWFS.”?
>
> Lastly, the Court of Appeals held that Caleda and her predecessors-in-
> interest were not guilty of laches as Caleda immediately sent several demand
> letters to DepEd after she discovered that Lot No. 7421 was being occupied
> by SFWFS. It also found that SFWFS acted in bad faith when it occupied Lot
> No. 7421 even though it knew that only Lot No. 7420 was sold to it.”*
>
> The dispositive portion of the Decision provides:
>
> WHEREFORE, the petition is DENIED. The assailed Decision is
> AFFIRMED in toto.
>
> SO ORDERED.”
>
> In its March 6, 2024 Resolution, the Court of Appeals denied Caleda’s
> Motion for Reconsideration.2° Thus, a Petition for Review was filed.
>
> Through the Office of the Solicitor General, petitioner Department of
> Education, as represented by Region I] OlC-Regional Director Dr. Estela
> Carino, argues that public policy prohibits the ejectment of the government
> from a property already devoted to public use. It insists that it may exercise
>
> the power of eminent domain to take over the property, and that respondent fo
>
> 21 Id. at 147.
> 22 Id. at 57.
>
> Id. at 58.
>
> /d. at 60.
>
> Id. at 62.
>
> 6 Id. at 63-64.
>
> Iwo
> na ko
>
> we
> wa)
>
>
> Decision 5 G.R. No. 272507
>
> Princess Joama Marcosa A. Caleda’s only recourse is to seek just
> compensation.”’
>
> Petitioner also argues that respondent lost her rights to the property due
> to laches as her predecessors-in-interest sat idly while SFWFS occupied Lot
> No. 7421 and built structures on it in the last five decades.”*
>
> While respondent does not contest petitioner’s power of eminent
> domain, she argues in her Comment that it runs contrary to her claim of
> ownership over the subject property since the two views are inconsistent.”
> Respondent insists that petitioner violated her constitutional right to due
> process when it occupied the subject property without instituting an
> expropriation proceeding.*”
>
> Respondent also argues that the jurisprudence cited by petitioner to
> justify its continued possession over the property devoted to public use is not
> applicable to the case at bar.*'! Respondent posits that, as aptly found by the
> Court of Appeals, she is not guilty of laches and as a registered owner, she has
> an imprescriptible right to evict respondents from the subject property.”
>
> The sole issue for this Court’s resolution is whether the Court of
> Appeals erred in affirming the lower courts’ ruling ordering petitioner to
> vacate Lot No. 7421 and to turn over its possession to respondent.
>
> The Petition lacks merit.
>
> Only questions of law may be raised in a petition for review on
> certiorari? Pascual v. Burgos* instructs:
>
> The Rules of Court require that only questions of law should be
> raised in petitions filed under Rule 45. This court is not a trier of facts. It
> will not entertain questions of fact as the factual findings of the appellate
> courts are final, binding, or conclusive on the parties and upon this court
> when supported by substantial evidence. Factual findings of the appellate
> courts will not be reviewed nor disturbed on appeal to this court.*> (Citations
> omitted)
>
> 27 Id. at 26-28.
>
> 28 Id. at 35-39,
>
> 2) Id. at 199.
>
> 40 Td. at 199-201.
>
> 3 Id. at 201.
>
> 42 Id. at 207-208.
>
> 38 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, Rule 45, sec. | provides:
> Section |. Filing of petition with Supreme Court. — A party desiring to appeal by certiorari from a
> judgment or final order or resolution of the Court of Appeals, the Sandiganbayan, the Regional Trial
> Court or other courts whenever authorized by law, may file with the Supreme Court a verified petition
> for review on certiorari. The petition shall raise only questions of law which must be distinctly set forth.
>
> 4-776 Phil. 167 (2016) [Per J. Leonen, Second Division].
>
> fd. at 182.
>
>
> Decision | 6 G.R. No. 272507
>
> Further, this Court has the prerogative to only rule on matters when
> “special and important reasons””® are present, such as when the lower court’s
> ruling manifestly contravenes laws and established jurisprudence. Absent an
> obvious deviation from settled doctrines, this Court will stay its hand.*” Here,
> there is no reason to disturb the unanimous findings of the lower courts.
>
> The Court has identified and distinguished three types of action for
> recovery of possession of real property:
>
> Accion interdictal comprises two distinct causes of action, namely,
> forcible entry (defentacion) and unlawful detainer (desahuico) [sic]. In
> forcible entry, one is deprived of physical possession of real property by
> means of force, intimidation, strategy, threats, or stealth whereas in unlawful
> detainer, one illegally withholds possession after the expiration or
> termination of his right to hold possession under any contract, express or
> implied. The two are distinguished from each other in that in forcible entry,
> the possession of the defendant is illegal from the beginning, and that the
> issue is which party has prior de facto possession while in unlawful detainer,
> possession of the defendant is originally legal but became illegal due to the
> expiration or termination of the right to possess.
>
> The jurisdiction of these two actions, which are summary in nature,
> lies in the proper municipal trial court or metropolitan trial court. Both
> actions must be brought within one year from the date of actual entry on the
> land, in case of forcible entry, and from the date of last demand, in case of
> unlawful detainer. The issue in said cases is the right to physical possession.
>
> Accion publiciana is the plenary action to recover the right of
> possession which should be brought in the proper regional trial court when
> dispossession has lasted for more than one year. It is an ordinary civil
> proceeding to determine the better right of possession of realty
> independently of title. In other words, if at the time of the filing of the
> complaint more than one year had elapsed since defendant had turned
> plaintiff out of possession or defendant's possession had become illegal, the
> action will be, not one of the forcible entry or illegal detainer, but an accion
> publiciana, On the other hand, accion reivindicatoria is an action to recover
> ownership also brought in the proper regional trial court in an ordinary civil
> proceeding.*®
>
> Accion publiciana is a “plenary action for recovery of possession in an
> ordinary civil proceeding in order to determine the better and legal right to
> possess, independently of title.”°’ While accion publiciana is mainly to
>
> © People v. Kumar, 874 Phil. 214 (2020) [Per J. Leonen, Third Division].
>
> 7 td.
>
> 8 De Feru v. Manzanero, 906 Phil. 462, 480-481 (2021) [Per J. J. Lopez, Third Division], citing Heirs of
> Yusingco v. Busilak, 824 Phil. 454, 460-461 (2018) [Per J. Peralta, Second Division]; Spouses Valdez,
> Jr. v. Court of Appeals, 523 Phil. 39, 45-46 (2006) [Per J. Chico-Nazario, First Division]; Encarnacion
> v. Amigo, 533 Phil. 466, 472 (2006) [Per J. Ynares-Santiago, First Division]; Suarez v. Spouses Emboy,
> Jr., 729 Phil. 315, 329--330 (2014) [Per J. Reyes, First Division].
>
> ”  Bejar v. Caluag, 544 Phil. 774, 779 (2007) [Per J. Sandoval-Gutierrez, First Division].
>
>
> Decision 7 G.R. No. 272507
>
> recover possession, ownership of the property may be provisionally passed
> upon by the court if it is necessary to resolve the issue of possession.”°
>
> Respondent alleged that she is the absolute owner of a parcel of rice
> land designated as Lot No. 7421, registered in the name of the heirs of Bueno
> Gallebo under OCT No. 4975 and acquired via an Extrajudicial Settlement of
> Estate with Waiver of Rights and Sale.*! She claimed that petitioner refused
> to vacate and surrender possession of the lot despite repeated demands. Thus,
> she asked that petitioner be ordered to vacate the lot and to deliver possession
> to her.
>
> Meanwhile, petitioner anchored its claim over Lot No. 7421 on the July
> 7, 1965 Deed of Sale between Bueno Gallebo and SFWES. In fact, throughout
> the proceedings before the trial courts, petitioner insisted on its ownership of
> the subject lot by virtue of this sale, thereby claiming to be its rightful
> possessor.
>
> A perusal of the Deed of Sale shows that it was Lot No. 7420 which
> was sold to SFWFS:
>
> “(T]he parcel of land with improvement thereon, situated in the Barrio
> Oraga, municipality of Solana, province of Cagayan in the Philippines,
> more particularly bounded and described as follows; under TD #24553
> ... It is a piece of cornland with an area of 14,966 square meters[.)’”
> (Emphasis supplied)
>
> OCT No. 4975, registered in the name of the heirs of Bueno Gallebo,
> covers two adjoining parcels of land: (1) Lot No. 7421 with an area of 10,637
> square meters,”? and (2) Lot No. 7420 with an area of 14,966 square meters.“
> Here, the Deed of Sale clearly describes Lot No. 7420 and not Lot No. 7421.
> Even petitioner’s own witness, SFWFS Principal Alejandro Cuntapay,
> admitted that SFWFS did not own Lot No. 7421.
>
> Lot No. 7421 remained unsold until respondent bought it from the heirs
> of Bueno Gallebo on November 21, 2014.° The said sale was even confirmed
> by the vendor himself, Francisco Gallebo, Jr., the only child of Francisco
> Gallebo, Sr.4” From this ownership stems respondent’s right to possess Lot
> No. 7421.48
>
> ”  Eversley Childs Sanitarium vy. Spouses Barbarona, 829 Phil. 111 (2018) [Per J. Leonen, Third Division].
> NV Rollo, p. 89.
>
> 2 Id. at 58.
>
> Bo dd. at 50.
>
> dd. at 138.
>
> Wo fd. av 117.
>
> wid. at 146.
>
> Yo fd. at 139.
>
> PLDT vy. Citi Appliance, 864 Phil. 899 (2019) [Per J. Leonen, Third Division].
>
>
> ty
>
> Decision 8 G.R. No. 272507
>
> Thus, the trial courts did not err in ruling that respondent had a better
> right to possess Lot No. 7421. She was able to prove her ownership of the
> property through a preponderance of evidence.
>
> In an effort to retain possession of the subject lot, petitioner, for the first
> time before the Court of Appeals’? and now before this Court, argues that it
> cannot be ejected from the lot because it is already devoted to public use,?
> To support this, petitioner cites the cases of National Transmission
> Corporation v. Bermuda Development Corporation’! and Republic v.
> Mendoza.”
>
> A scrutiny of these cases shows that the government may not be ejected
> only in cases where there is a concomitant neglect on the part of the owner to
> assert their rights to the property, which is tantamount to an implied
> acquiescence.
>
> In National Transmission Corporation, respondent Bermuda
> Development Corporation filed a case for unlawful detainer against petitioner
> National Transmission Corporation, a public service corporation. The
> Municipal Trial Court ruled in favor of the respondent and ordered petitioner
> to vacate the lot in dispute. Pending appeal, petitioner filed an expropriation
> case, deposited the provisional value of the property, and was granted a writ
> of possession.>? The Court ruled that:
>
> [I}f a landowner, knowing that a railroad company has entered upon
> [their] land and is engaged in constructing its road without having complied
> with a statute requiring either payment by agreement or proceedings to
> condemn, remains inactive and permits it to go on and expend large sums
> in the work, [they are] estopped from maintaining either trespass or
> ejectment for the entry, and will be regarded as having acquiesced therein,
> and will be restricted to a suit for damages.°* (Emphasis supplied)
>
> Moreover, the categorical ruling in National Transmission
> Corporation—which states that a case for recovery of possession or ejectment
> will not prosper against the government when it occupies a land without prior
> acquisition of title—specifically applies to public utility corporations vested
> with the power of eminent domain for reasons of public policy and necessity.
>
> Here, not only did petitioner fail to institute proper expropriation
> proceedings, it is also not a public utility corporation. Thus, the ruling in
> National Transmission Corporation is inapplicable.
>
> "Rollo, p. 55.
>
> 30 Id. at 22.
>
> 5! 851 Phil. 38 (2019) [Per J. Caguioa, Second Division].
> 641 Phil. 562 (2010) [Per J. Abad, Second Division].
> 3 Id. at 41-42.
>
> 34 Id. at 46.
>
>
> Decision | 9 G.R. No. 272507
>
> In Mendoza, respondents Primo and Maria Mendoza filed an ejectment
> suit against petitioner over a property it has used to operate a public school.
> However, the evidence on record revealed that the respondents intended to
> cede the property to the local government unit permanently because: (1) they
> allowed the city to declare it for taxation purposes; and (2) they earmarked a
> specific lot for the city when they subdivided the mother title. Thus:
>
> The Court holds that, where the owner. agrees voluntarily to the
> taking of his property by the government for public use, he thereby waives
> his right to the institution of a formal expropriation proceeding covering
> such property. Further, as the Court also held in Eusebio v. Luis, the failure
> for a Jong time of the owner to question the lack of expropriation
> proceedings covering a property that the government had taken constitutes
> a waiver of his right to gain back possession. The Mendozas’ remedy is an
> action for the payment of just compensation, not ejectment.°° (Emphasis
> supplied)
>
> In Manila Railroad Company v. Paredes,>’ this Court held that there
> must be a concurrence of two conditions before a public institution, endowed
> with the power of eminent domain, may retain possession of a private property
> which it occupied without a title:
>
> The cases are practically unanimous in principle, and turn upon the
> point whether the railroad company has the capacity to acquire the land in
> dispute by virtue of its delegated power of eminent domain, and, if so,
> whether the company occupied the land with the express or implied consent
> or acquiescence of the owner. If these questions of fact be decided in the
> affirmative, it is uniformly held that an action of ejectment or trespass or
> injunction will not lie against the railroad company, but only an action for
> damages, that is, recovery of the value of the land taken, and the
> consequential damages, if any. ... Under these circumstances, public policy,
> if not public necessity, demands that the owner of the land be denied the
> ordinarily remedies of ejectment and injunction. The fact that the railroad
> company has the capacity to eventually acquire the land by expropriation
> proceedings undoubtedly assists in coming to the conclusion that the
> property owner has no right to the remedies of ejectment or injunction.
> There is also something akin to equitable estoppel in the conduct of one who
> stands idly by and watches the construction of the railroad without protest.*
> (Emphasis supplied)
>
> In this case, there is no showing of any evidence that respondent or her
> predecessors-in-interest ceded the subject property in favor of petitioner. In
> fact, the petitioner’s own evidence would reveal that it only bought Lot No. WA
>
> Id. at 568.
>
> 46 ld.
>
> 37-32 Phil. 534, 537 (1915) [Per J. Trent, En Banc].
> 8 Id. at 537-538.
>
>
> Decision 10 G.R. No. 272507
>
> 7420 from petitioner’s predecessors-in-interest. The subject lot was not
> included in the Deed of Sale.°?
>
> Too, respondent’s actions after learning about SFWFS’s occupation of
> Lot No. 7421 cannot be considered express or implied acquiescence to the
> occupation which estops her from questioning it.
>
> To recall, respondent bought Lot No. 7421 from the heirs of Bueno
> Gallebo on November 21, 2014.°° Thereafter, respondent visited Lot No.
> 7421 for a relocation survey.°' It was only then that she and her predecessors-
> in-interest found that it was being occupied by SFWFS.® Respondent then
> sent several demand letters to petitioner, first on January 14, 2015 and the last
> one on January 20, 2016, for SFWFS to vacate the lot. When petitioner did
> not heed her request, she caused the annotation of her adverse claim on the
> title of the lot. Finally, on March 11, 2016, barely two years after the sale,
> respondent filed her Complaint.”
>
> Meanwhile, in Secretary of the Department of Public Works and
> Highways v. Spouses Tecson,® this Court laid down the remedies for an
> aggrieved private party when the government appropriates property for public
> use: |
>
> When a property is taken by the government for public use,
> jurisprudence clearly provides for the remedies available to a landowner.
> The owner may recover his property if its return is feasible or, if it is not,
> the aggrieved owner may demand payment of just compensation for the land
> taken. For failure of respondents to question the lack of expropriation
> proceedings for a long period of time, they are deemed to have waived and
> are estopped from assailing the power of the government to expropriate or
> the public use for which the power was exercised. What is left to
> respondents is the right of compensation. The trial and appellate courts
> found that respondents are entitled to compensation. The only issue left for
> determination is the propriety of the amount awarded to respondents.®
> (Emphasis supplied, citations omitted)
>
> In relying on the case of Secretary of the Department of Public Works
> and Highways, petitioner claims that the physical return of the property on
> which SFWFS stands is no longer feasible.®* According to petitioner, it is
> entitled to possession pending respondent’s formal transfer of ownership to It
> upon the payment of just compensation computed in accordance with the
>
> ” — Rollo, p. 58.
>
> 60 Id. at 174.
>
> 61 dd. at 122, 170.
>
> 2 Id. at 58-59.
>
> “3 fd. at 90.
>
> ol Id. at 176.
>
> 65 Id. at 89-91.
>
> 66 713 Phil. 55 (2013) [Per J. Peralta, Third Division].
> 67 Id. at 70.
>
> 68 Rollo, p, 29.
>
>
> Decision
>
> formula laid down in Republic v. Spouses Nocom.®” Thus, it prayed that the
> case be remanded to the trial court for the determination of just compensation
> from the time of petitioner’s taking of the property.
>
> This cannot be done. Heirs of Mariano v. City of Naga” clarified that
> an aggrieved party cannot simply demand just compensation in lieu of
>
> 1] G.R. No. 272507
>
> 70
>
> recovering possession in the absence of an expropriation case:
>
> 69
> 70
> 7\
>
> merely
>
> expropriated by the government.
>
> Id. at 30-31.
> Id. at 41.
>
> Invoking the case of Alfonso v. Pasay City, as cited in Republic v.
> Court of Appeals, the City argued that recovering possession of the subject
> property is no longer feasible because it is now occupied and used by the
> City Hall and other government offices, so that petitioners’ remedy is
>
> to demand payment of just compensation.
> The Court’s exact pronouncement in Alfonso states:
>
> As registered owner, (Alfonso) could bring an action
> to recover possession at any time because possession is one
> of the attributes of ownership of land. However, said
> restoration of possession by the City of Pasay is neither
> convenient nor feasible because it is now and has been used
> for road purposes. So, the only relief available is for the City
> of Pasay to make due compensation, which it could and
> should have done years ago since 1925.
>
> It will be noted, however, that in the cases thus invoked, and in other
> cases where the Court made a similar ruling, the government took the
> property in the exercise of its power of eminent domain. This case clearly
> involves a different factual milieu as the subject property was not
> It had been offered by its owners-
> developers, under certain terms, for donation to the City as the City Hall and
> market sites within the subdivision, which offer the City clearly had the
> option to refuse. In fact, the Subdivision’s General Manager, Lopez Jr.,
> appeared to have written to Macario essentially asking him to defer the
> donation because while the Municipal Board accepted their offer, they had
> considered “other and better alternative sites near the National Highway.”
>
> The “power of eminent domain” has been defined thus:
>
> The right of eminent domain is “the ultimate right of
> the sovereign power to appropriate, not only the public but
> the private property of all citizens within the territorial
> sovereignty, to public purpose.”
>
> [E]minent domain, also often referred to as
> expropriation and, with less frequency, as condemnation, is,
> like police power and taxation, an inherent power of
> sovereignty. It need not be clothed with any constitutional
> gear lo exist; instead, provisions in our Constitution on the
> subject are meant more to regulate, rather than to grant, the
> exercise of the power. Eminent domain is generally so
>
> 827 Phil. 531 (2018) [Per J. Tijam, First Division].
>
>
> Decision 12 G.R. No. 272507
>
> described as “the highest and most exact idea of property
> remaining in the government” that may be acquired for some
> public purpose through a method in the nature of a forced
> purchase by the State.
>
> In the instant case, ‘there was no such appropriation or
> condemnation or forced purchase to speak of. The City was not propelled
> by an imperative need to take the subject property for a public purpose. The
> City, in taking: possession of the subject property, was not exercising a
> sovereign function as expropriator. In this light, the Alfonso ruling cannot
> be applied to petitioners.”? (Emphasis supplied, citations omitted)
>
> Here, it is undisputed that petitioner failed to file an expropriation case
> to acquire the subject lot. In fact, petitioner abandoned its initial defense in
> the lower courts, which claimed ownership of Lot No. 7421 based on a Deed
> of Sale, and only raised the argument of eminent domain for the first time
> before this Court. However, petitioner cannot transform its appeal into an
> expropriation proceeding.
>
> For one, this Court is not a trier of facts. “An expropriation proceeding
> of private lands has two stages: first, the determination of plaintiffs authority
> to exercise the power of eminent domain in the context of the facts of the case
> and, second, if there be such authority, the determination of just
> compensation.”’? These are factual questions beyond the ambit of a Rule 45
> petition.
>
> Second, even if we were to review the evidence on record, the Court
> cannot determine whether the return of Lot No. 7421 is feasible. Petitioner
> claims that the school itself stands on the subject lot.” However, its own
> witness — Alejandro Cuntapay, the school principal of SFWFS -— testified that
> there are no permanent structures on the subject lot:
>
> But vou stated Mr. Witness that it has been exclusively used for
> agricultural purposes?
> Yes ma’am.
>
> What are these acts when you say agricultural purposes Mr.
> Witness?
>
> The improvement is that the school was able to convert it into rice
> fields, farm lands, where in [sic] students maximize the utilization
> of this improvements in agriculture and fishery ma’am. In fact the
> [number] of hectares | think is more or less 7 hectares in rice field
> then fish pond is less than 2 hectares.
>
> PrP O FF
>
> Q: Yes Mr. Witness, but you stated a while back that the lot in suit is
> already been occupied by permanent structures, is that correct?
>
> A: lam referring to the entire school site ma’am. A
>
> Id. at 562-564.
> City of Manila v. Alegar Corporation, 689 Phil. 34, 38 (2012) [Per J. Abad, Third Division].
> "Rollo, p. 29.
>
>
> Decision 13 G.R. No. 272507
>
> Q: No that’s why I am asking[—]
>
> A: No, | am specifically answering that question ma’am, that Lot 7420
> and 7421 was being developed into laboratory for agriculture and
> laboratory for fishery.
>
> Q: So which is which Mr. Witness, the lot in suit is not being occupied
> by permanent structures, is that what you are saying?
>
> A: Yes ma'‘am, if you consider the perimeter fence as permanent
> structure, that is one improvement that the school introduce
> regarding the perimeter fence.
>
> Q: So to clarify Mr. Witness, what is being introduced with permanent
> structures is the entire school site?
>
> A: Yes ma’am.” (Emphasis supplied)
>
> Thus, the cases cited by petitioner to support the argument that it cannot
> be ejected from property devoted to public use do not apply in this case.
>
> Respondent’s actions also militate against petitioner’s claim that she is
> barred by laches from asserting her rights over the property. It has long been
> settled that:
>
> Laches is the failure or neglect, for an unreasonable and unexplained
> length of time, to do that which, by exercising due diligence, could or should
> have been done earlier; it is negligence or omission to assert a right within
> a reasonable time, warranting the presumption that the party entitled to
> assert it either has abandoned or declined to assert it. There is no absolute
> rule as to what constitutes laches or staleness of demand; each case is to be
> determined according to its particular circumstances, with the question of
> laches addressed to the sound discretion of the court. Because laches is an
> equitable doctrine, its application is controlled by equitable considerations
> and should not be used to defeat justice or to perpetuate fraud or injustice.”
> (Citations omitted)
>
> Here, respondent acted as soon as she learned of SFWFS’s occupation
> of Lot No. 7421 by sending demand letters, having dialogues with petitioner,”’
> annotating her adverse claim, and then filing a Complaint when everything
> else failed. These actions were all done by respondent in a span of less than
> two years. Given these circumstances, the Court is not disposed to conclude
> that there was an unreasonable or unexplained delay on respondent’s part
> constituting laches. |
>
> Moreover, the doctrine of laches is not applicable to registered lands
> covered by the Torrens System:
>
> td at 127.
> % Spouses Esmaquel v. Coprada, 653 Phil. 96, 107 (2010) [Per J. Peralta, Second Division].
> 7 Rollo, p. 60.
>
>
> Decision 14 G.R. No. 272507
>
> The Court has consistently held that laches cannot apply to
> registered land covered by a Torrens Title because under the Property
> Registration Decree, no title to registered land in derogation to that of the
> registered owner shall be acquired by prescription or adverse possession.
>
> In Casibang, the Court ruled in favor of a registered owner and
> upheld the indefeasibility and incontrovertibility of a registered title as
> against the school's possession by mere tolerance. In said case, the
> registered owner therein allowed the construction and operation of a school
> ona portion of his property because he had no use of it at the time. However,
> when his successors-in-interest sought to recover possession of the lot, the
> DepEd refused alleging that its possession was in the concept of an owner
> because it had purchased it from the original registered owner. The Court
> ruled against the DepEd because it failed to produce any competent proof
> of transfer of ownership. Hence, their possession of the subject property was
> only by mere tolerance and not in the concept of an owner.’* (Citations
> omitted)
>
> Similarly, petitioner failed to present any competent evidence of
> ownership over Lot No. 7421, in contrast to respondent, whose predecessors-
> in-interest were the registered owners of the property. As such, the respondent
> has the right to recover possession of the lot.
>
> All told, the Court of Appeals did not err in affirming the lower courts’
> decision ordering petitioner to vacate Lot No. 7421 and turn over its
> possession to respondent for having proven her better right to possession.
>
> Significantly, these findings are provisional and solely pertain to the
> resolution of the present action for recovery of possession. They do not, in
> any way, preclude the State from initiating an expropriation case in a separate
> proceeding.
>
> ACCORDINGLY, the Petition for Review is DENIED for lack of
> merit. The September 27, 2023 Decision and March 6, 2024 Resolution of
> the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. SP No. 172008 are AFFIRMED. Petitioner
> Department of Education, as represented by Region IJ OIC-Regional Director
> Dr. Estela Carino, is ordered to VACATE Lot No. 7421 described under
> Original Certificate of Title No. P-4975 and to turn over its possession to
> respondent Princess Joama Marcosa A. Caleda.
>
> SO ORDERED.
>
> Senior Associate Justice
>
> % Department of Education, Culture, and Sports v. Heirs of Banguilan, 833 Phil. 943, 955-956 (2018) [Per
> J. Reyes, Jr., Second Division].
>
>
> Decision 15 G.R. No. 272507
>
> AMY €. LA@ARO-JAVIER
> Associate Justice
> smosr¥lZorez
>
> Associate Justice
>
> GMO T. KHO, JR.
> FORE KHO, IR
> Associate Justice
>
> ATTESTATION
>
> WE CONCUR:
>
> | attest that the conclusions in the above Decision had been reached in
> consultation before the case was assigned to the writer of the opinion of the
> Court’s Division.
>
> Senior Associate Justice
> Chairperson
>
> CERTIFICATION
>
> Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 13 of the Constitution and the Division
> Chairperson’s Attestation, I certify that the conclusions in the above Decision
> had been reached in consultation before the case was assigned to the writer of
> the opinion of the Court’s Division.
>
> ER G. GESMUNDO
> Chief Justice
