# GR-258968

**Danilo Solina Zausa vs. People of the Philippines.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: Danilo Solina Zausa vs. People of the Philippines.
- **Ponente**: LEONEN, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: April 19, 2021
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/258968.pdf)

---

> Supreme Court of tu Pllilippian
> OfflCIOPTRE 9PODSPIUON
> •
> RECEIVED
> tfl~
> By,_
> ~ Ci ~Time: Jc:$f
> )
> ~epublic of tbe f!bilippineg:.=.. = "'·::-~•. ~. ====.J
> ~uprcme Qfourt
> Jmanila
> SECOND DIVISION
> DANILO SOLINA ZAUSA, G.R. No. 258968
> Petitioner,
> Present:
> LEONEN, J., Chairperson,
> .LAZARO-JAVIER,
> -versus-
> LOPEZ,
> KHO, JR., and
> VILLANUEVA, JJ.
> PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES,
> Respondent.
> x-----------------------------------------------------------------
> DECISION
> LEONEN,J.:
> This case requires the determination of whether a barangay chairman
> who borrows money from a private person and states that the amount would
> be used for official expenses, despite the intent to personally use the money,
> is guilty of corrupt practices of public officers under Section 3(e) of Republic
> Act No. 3019 or the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act.
> Before this Court is a Petition for Review on Certiorari assailing the
> Decision1 and Resolution2 of the Sandiganbayan, which affirmed the I
> Rollo, pp. 41--o5. The April 19, 2021 Decision in SB-20-A/R-0020 was penned by Associate Justice
> Rafael R. Lagos and concurred in by Associate Justices Maria Theresa V. Mendoza-Arcega and Mary
> Ann E. Corpus-Mafialac of the Fifth Division, Sandiganbayan, Quezon City.
> 2 Id at 66-70. The October 15, 2021 Resolution in SB-20-A/R-0020 was penned by Associate Justice
> Rafael R. Lagos and concurred in by Associate Justices Maria Theresa V. Mendoza-Arcega and Mary
> Ann E. Corpus-Mafialac of the Fifth Division, Sandiganbayan, Quezon City.
>
> Decision 2 G.R. No. 258968
> Decision3 of the Regional Trial Court convicting petitioner Danilo Solina
> Zausa (Zausa) of violation of Section 3(e) of Republic Act No. 3019.
> •Z ausa, then Barangay Chairman of Barangay 404, Zone 41, District IV,
> Sampaloc, Manila, was charged with violating Section 3(e) of Republic Act
> No. 3019 in an Information that reads: •
> Criminal Case No. 312-V-17
> That sometime in March 2016, in the City of Manila, Philippines,
> being then a Barangay Chairman of Barangay 404, Zone 41, District IV,
> Sampaloc, this city and therefore public officer, did then and there willfully,
> unlawfully, knowingly and with evident bad faith, ask and obtain monetary
> loan from GLORIA C. MERZA in the total amount of [PHP] 226,000.00, as
> supposed payment for barangay rentals and various office supplies in behalf
> of the barangay council, thus, by said representation and he was acting on
> behalf of the barangay council, induced and succeeding in inducing the latter
> to give and deliver, as in fact, she gave and delivered to the said accused the
> total amount of [PHP] 226,000.0[0], causing undue injury to Gloria C. Merza
> and public interest.
> CONTRARY TO LAW.4
> During arraignment on March 6, 2019, Zausa pleaded not guilty to the
> charge. Trial then ensued.5
> The prosecution presented private complainant Gloria C. Merza
> (Merza), the General Manager of PAM General Merchandise, as its sole
> witness.
> According to Merza, a barangay chairman introduced her to Zausa as
> the Barangay Chairman of Barangay 404, Zone 41, District IV, Sampaloc,
> Manila in February 2016. At that time, Zausa was allegedly looking for a
> contractor-supplier. 6
> A month later, Zausa called to borrow [PHP] 100,000.00 to pay for the
> barangay's office supplies and rental expenses as there was no money left in
> the bank, to which she agreed. As security for the loan, Zausa executed a
> Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) check under the account name "404, Zone
> 41, District 4, Barangay Council, Manila," payable to his order in the amount
> of [PHP] 100,000.00, and signed by Zausa and a barangay treasurer. Zausa
> also signed a promissory note acknowledging the receipt of the [PHP]
> 100,000.00 from Merza and promised to pay the cash advance on or before/
> 3 Id. at 90-94. The October 14, 2019 Decision in Crim. Case No. R-MNL-18-10235-CR was penned by
> Judge Teresa Patrimonio-Soriaso of the Branch 27, Regional Trial Court, Manila City.
> 4 Id at 42.
> Id.
> Id. at 47.
>
> Decision 3 G.R. No. 258968
> March 30, 2016, upon the withdrawal ofbarangay rental funds. Zausa further
> stated that if he could not obtain money from the barangay funds, he would
> pay Merza from the commissions from his business of buying and selling
> lots.7
> Merza clarified that Zausa was 1ndicated as the payee of the LBP check
> because he would encash it and give the money to her. Merza also disclosed
> that the loan had no interest since Zausa repeatedly promised that he would
> involve her in barangay projects.8
> Merza further claimed that Zausa obtained an additional loan from her
> to purchase various office supplies for the barangay's operations amounting
> to [PHP] 126,000.00. These meetings took place at PNB Recto branch, SM
> Manila food court, and Barangay Hall at Sergio Loyola St., Sampaloc,
> Manila.9 During these meetings, Zausa was always accompanied by the
> barangay treasurer and sometimes by a kagawad.10 Merza listed down the
> loan on a sheet of paper, which was signed by Zausa. 11
> After the loans remained unpaid, Merza went to the Manila Barangay
> Bureau to file a complaint against Zausa.12
> On July 12, 2016, Merza and Zausa met before the director of the
> Manila Barangay Bureau. During this meeting, Zausa made a partial payment
> of [PHP] 25,000.00 and exe~uted another promissory note stating that he will
> •p ay the [PHP] 201,000.00 balance on July 18, 2016. The promissory note was
> signed by both Merza and Zausa.13
> While Zausa failed to pay the entire outstanding balance on July 18,
> 2016, he paid Merza [PHP] 30,000.00 on July 27, 2016. Thus, a balance of
> [PHP] 171,000.00 remained.14 As explanation for his nonpayment, Zausa
> claimed that he could not access the barangay funds becamse the barangay's
> bank account was put on hold by the Commission on Audit. However, upon
> Merza's inquiry, the Commission on Audit said Zausa'~ statements were
> false, but the agency refused to issue a certification: 15
> !
> I
> I
> Afterward, Merza sent demand letters to Zausa on february 27, 2018
> and April 4, 2018 to pay the. outstanding.loans. These lette' s were personally
> received by Zausa and signed by him upon receipt. 16
> Id at47-48.
> 8 Id. at 47.
> 9 Id at 47-48.
> ,o Id. at 49.
> 11 Id. at 48.
> r2 Id
> " Id.
> " Id.
> " Id.
> " Id.
>
> Decision 4 G.R. No. 258968
> However, Zausa neither replied to the letters nor pay the balance of the
> loans, prompting Merza to file a complaint-affidavit before the Office of the
> Ombudsman.17
> For his part, Zausa confirmed that he was the Barangay Chairman of
> Barangay 404 when he borrowed money from Merza, 18 but he denied the other
> allegations against him.19
> Zausa narrated that Barangay Chairman Rivero,2° introduced him to
> Merza as Zausa needed to borrow [PHP] 100,000.00 for his niece's breast
> cancer operation.21 However, he only started to talk about borrowing money
> after he met Merza the third time. During those meetings, Merza would ask
> him if she could get projects from his barangay, but Zausa explained that he
> would need to get his contractor's consent. Zausa clarified that he never
> promised Merza that he would engage her services as he already had his own
> contractor. It was only after he secured the loan from Merza that he denied
> her request. 22
> Zausa admitted that he borrowed [PHP] 100,000.00 from Merza. He
> convinced her to lend him more money-the total amount of which he cannot
> recall---on the promise that he will fully pay his loan once he receives his
> commission from the land sale. He admitted, however, that he did not pay
> Merza after the sale was completed on May 15, 2019 since the commission
> was not yet released to him.23
> Further, Zausa insisted that the loan was a personal loan, despite the
> statement in the promissory note that it was for the payment of barangay
> rentals.24 He explained that Merza prepared the promissory note and included
> that statement.25 Zausa said he no longer contested and just affixed his
> signature so he could borrow money from her.26 1,-Ie also admitted that he
> issued a check under the barangay's account name, with him as the payee.
> Zausa did not inform the barangay council of his loan because he felt it was
> unnecessary to do so.27
> Zausa also confirmed that during the July 12, 2016 meeting with the
> Manila Barangay Bureau Director, he signed the second promissory note and
> 17 Id at 48-49.
> 18 Id. at 52.
> 19 /d.at51.
> 20 Id at 53.
> " /d.at51.
> 22 Id. at 52.
> 23 Id. at 53.
> 24 Jd.
> 25 JdatSI.
> 26 Id. at 54.
> 27 Id at 53.
>
> Decision 5 G.R. No. 258968
> paid Merza [PHP] 30,000.00,18 which was taken from the earnings of his small
> eatery business.29
> In an October 14, 2019 Decision,30 the Regional Trial Court convicted
> Zausa of violating Section 3(e) of Republic Act No. 3019. The dispositive
> portion of the Decision reads:
> WHEREFORE, in view of all. the foregoing, judgment is hereby
> rendered finding the ll.ccused DANILO S. ZAUSA a.k.a. DANILO
> ZAUSA y SOLINA, guilty beyond reasonable doubt of the crime of
> Violation of Section 3 (e) of Republic Act No. 3019, and considering the
> Indeterminate Sentence Law, hereby sentences him to suffer the penalty of
> imprisonment for an indeterminate period of six (6 ) years and one (1)
> month, as minimum, to ten (10) years and six (6) months, as maximum, with
> perpetual disqualification from public office, and is ordered to pay private
> complainant GLORIA C. MERZA the amount of [PHP] 198,500.00 as
> actual damages, 31 with legal interest of six percent (6 %) per annum from
> finality of this Decision until fully paid.
> SO ORDERED.32
> The Regional Trial Court held that all the elements to hold one liable
> for violation of Section 3(e) of Republic Act No. 3019 were present in this
> case. First, Zausa was the Barangay Chairman of Barangay 404, Zone 41,
> District IV, Sampaloc, Manila and, therefore, a public officer when the
> transactions occurred. Second, he committed the prohibited acts in relation to
> the performance of his official duties. He led Merza to believe that the [PHP]
> 100,000.00 loan would be'"used to fund the barangay's rental expenses and
> purchase of office supplies. This is supported by the March 10, 2016
> promissory note. The additional [PHP] 126,000.00 loan, on the other hand,
> was substantiated through the July 12, 2016 promissory note, which stated
> that Zausa had a remaining balance of [PHP] 201,000.00, as well as the two
> demand letters for [PHP] 165,000.00 and [PHP] 198,500.00, respectively.
> Third, Zausa caused undue injury to Merza, a private party, when he failed to
> pay the loans. Fourth, Zausa acted in bad faith when he committed the
> following acts: (a) he misled Merza into believing that the loans would be
> used to pay for the barangay' s expenses; (b) he lied when he said that the
> barangay urgently needed money, but the Commission on Audit prohibited
> any withdrawals from their funds; ( c) he promised to pay the loans once the
> prohibition was lifted; and ( d) he issued a check drawn against the LBP
> account ofBarangay 404, Zone 41, District IV, Sampaloc, Manila payable to
> 33
> himself. /
> 28 Id.
> 29 IdatSI-52.
> 30 Id. at 90-94.
> 31 Note: This amount was based on Merza's April 3, 2018 Demand Letter.
> 32 Id. at 93-94.
> 33 Id at 92-93,
>
> Decision 6 G.R. No. 258968
> On appeal, the Sandiganbayan affirmed the Regional Trial Court's
> ruling as all the elements for a violation of Section 3(e ) of Republic Act No.
> 3019 existed. 34
> The Sandiganbayan agreed that Zausa was discharging his official
> functions as a public officer when he committed the crime. It took into
> consideration the unrebutted conclusions that Zausa used his official function
> to create an impression of authority to entice Merza to lend him money for the
> payment ofbarangay expenses. The promissory notes with Zausa's signature
> expressly stated that the loans were for the payment of these expenses. Merza
> was even led to believe that she could benefit as a potential future contractor
> or supplier for the barangay. Thus, there was a direct relation between the
> commission of the crime and Zausa's official position as Barangay Chairman,
> which satisfies the first element. The Sandiganbayan also struck down
> Zausa's argument that the lack of authorization or resolution from the
> Sangguniang Barangay was proof of the personal nature of the loans rather
> than one obtained in his official capacity.35
> As to the second element, the Sandiganbayan held that Zausa acted with
> evident bad faith evident in the furtive design and scheming method he
> employed to obtain the loans. He took advantage of his official position as
> barangay chairman since he knew that Merza, as a contractor-supplier, would
> benefit from potential projects in his barangay. Zausa also did not deny that
> he and Merza discussed the prospect of her becoming a contractor for the
> projects. Without his position, Merza would not have been enticed to extend
> a total amount of [PHP] 226,000.00 to Zausa. Zausa even lied when he said
> that the loans would be paid once barangay funds were released but avoided
> payment by pretending that the Commission on Audit imposed a restriction
> on withdrawals.36
> • •• • •• • •
> The third element also existed in this case, according to the
> Sandiganbayan, as Merza suffered undue injury. Due to his refusal to pay the
> outstanding amount of [PHP] 171,000.00, Merza was unduly deprived of the
> use and benefits of such amount in her business as a contractor-supplier of
> merchandise and supplies to other barangays, thereby entitling her to actual
> damages.37
> The dispositive portion of the April 19, 2021 Decision of the
> Sandiganbayan reads:
> WHEREFORE, in view of the foregoing, the appeal is DENIED
> for lack of merit. The Decision of the Regional Trial Court, National
> Capital Judicial Region, Branch 27, Manila finding accused-appellant
> 34 Id. at 4]---{j5_
> 35 Id at 56-60.
> 36 Id at 60---{j2_
> 37 ld. at 62---{j4_
>
> Decision 7 G.R. No. 258968
> Danilo S. Zausa guilty beyond reasonable doubt of Violation of Section 3(e )
> ofR.A. No. 3019, as amended, is hereby AFFIRMED in toto.
> SO ORDERED.38
> Zausa moved for reconsideration but this was denied by the
> Sandiganbayan in its October 15, 2021 Resolution.39
> Dissatisfied, Zausa filed a Petition for Review on Certiorari40 before
> this Court.
> Petitioner argues that the prosecution failed to establish beyond
> reasonable doubt all the elements of a violation of Section 3(e ) of Republic
> Act No. 3019. He insists ih~t heobtain~d the loans from Merza in his personal
> capacity and denies that the loans were meant to pay for the barangay's rental
> expenses and office •s upplies. Further, petitioner points out that Merza
> extended the loans to him not because he was a Barangay Chairman, but due
> to his promise to pay the loans out of the commissions from his real estate
> business. Further, the second promissory note expressly described the nature
> of the remaining balance of the loans as "personal cash advances." Thus, there
> is no basis to say that Merza lent him money by reason of his position as a
> public officer.41
> Petitioner also avers that he did not act in bad faith, which must take
> part in the nature of fraud. He honestly believed that Merza lent him money
> in his personal capacity, especially since he did not present any authorization
> from the barangay council. Petitioner notes that if the LBP check was truly
> issued as collateral for the loans on behalf of the barangay, it should have been
> payable to Merza's order and not his. Further, no evidence was presented to
> show that he obtained the loans with ill-will or for wrongdoing. Petitioner
> insists that his only fault was his failure to insist on the deletion of the phrase
> "as payment for barangay rentals."42
> Finally, petitioner asserts that there is no sufficient proof of undue
> injury on Merza's part. The statements that his failure to pay the loans
> negatively affected her financial capacity, prejudiced her rights and interests
> as a creditor, and damaged her reputation as a contractor-supplier are purely
> speculative. Merza merely gave vague statements regarding petitioner's
> failure to fulfill his promise to pay.43 Thus, he insists that he only caused her /
> "some form of inconvenience."44
> 38 Id. at 64.
> 39 Id at 66-70.
> 40 Id at 13-38.
> 41 Id at 26-28.
> 42 Id. at 28-3 1.
> 43 ld. at 31-32.
> 44 ld. at 32.
>
> Decision 8 G.R. No. 258968
> Considering the foregoing, petitioner maintains that he should be
> acquitted.
> In its Comment,45 respondent People of the Philippines, through the
> Office of the Solicitor General, states that the Sandiganbayan correctly upheld
> petitioner's conviction for violation of Section 3(e ) of Republic Act No. 3019
> as all the elements were present.46
> Respondent asserts that petitioner's other claims that "the loans
> obtained from Merza were secured in his personal capacity; there was no
> evidence to prove that Merza received any benefit in granting the loans to
> Zausa; and that he did not cause undue injury to Merza with evident bad faith
> were rehashed arguments[.]"47
> The issue for this Court's resolution is whether petitioner Danilo Solina
> Zausa is guilty beyond reasonable doubt of violation of Section 3(e) of
> Republic Act No. 3019.
> The Petition is denied.
> Petitioner is charged 'Yith_yiolatiol)pf,Section3( e) of Republic Act No.
> 3019, which states:
> SECTION 3. Corrupt practices ofp ublic officers. - In addition to acts or
> omissions of public officers already penalized by existing law, the
> following shall constitute corrupt practices of any public officer and are
> hereby declared to be unlawful:
> (e) Causing any undue injury to any party, including the Government, or
> giving any private party any unwarranted benefits, advantage or preference
> in the discharge of his official administrative or judicial functions through
> manifest partiality, evident bad faith or gross inexcusable negligence. This
> provision shall apply to officers and employees of offices or government
> corporations charged with the grant of licenses or permits or other
> concess10ns.
> In order to sustain a con'-_'.iction for tl:J.is crime, the following elements
> must concur:
> 45 Id. at 316-332.
> 46 Id. at 325-328.
> 47 Id. at 329.
>
> Decision 9 G.R. No. 258968
> I) The accused must be a public officer discharging administrative,
> judicial or official functions;
> 2) He must have acted with manifest partiality, evident bad faith or
> inexcusable negligence; and
> 3) That his action caused undue injury to any party, including the
> government, or gave any private party unwarranted benefits, advantage
> or preference in the discharge of his functions.48 (Citations omitted)
> For the second element, jurisprudence holds that the commission of the
> offense through any one of the modes, i.e., manifest partiality, evident bad
> faith, or inexcusable negligence, is sufficient. These modes are distinguished
> by the Court as follows:
> There is "manifest partiality" when there is a clear, notorious, or
> plain inclination or predilection to favor one side or person rather than
> another. "Evident. .bad faith" connotes not only bad judgment but also
> palpably and patently fraudulent and dishonest purpose to do moral
> obliquity or conscious wrongdoing for some perverse motive or ill will.
> "Evident bad faith" contemplates a state of mind affirmatively operating
> with furtive design or with some motive or self-interest or ill will or for
> ulterior purposes .. "Gross . .inexcusable negligence" refers to negligence
> characterized by the want of even the slightest care, acting or omitting
> to act in a situation where there is a duty to act, not inadvertently but
> willfully and intentionally, with conscious indifference to consequences
> insofar as other persons may be affected. 49
> The third element exists when the accused's action caused undue injury
> to any party, including the government, or gave any private party unwarranted
> benefits, advantage, or preference in the discharge of his or her functions. As
> explained in Cabrera v. People:50
> The third element refers to two (2) separate acts that qualify as a
> violation of Section 3 (e) of R.A No. 3019. An accused may be charged
> with the commission of either or both. The use of the disjunctive term "or"
> connotes that either act qualifies as a violation of Section 3 (e) ofR.A. No.
> 3019.
> The first punishable act is that the accused is said to have caused
> undue injury to the government or any party when the latter sustains actual
> loss or damage, which must exist as a fact and cannot be based on
> speculations or conjectures. The loss or damage need not be proven with
> actual certainty. However, there must be "some reasonable basis by which
> the court can measure it." Aside from this, the loss or damage must be
> substantial. It must be "more than necessary, excessive, improper or
> illegal."
> 48 Reyes v. People, 863 Phil. 611, 627 (2019) [Per J. Leonen, Third Division].
> 49 Abubakar v. People, 834 Phil. 435, 472 (2018) [Per J. Leanen, Third Division], citing Uriarte v. People,
> 540 Phil. 477 (2006) [Per J. Callejo, Sr., First Division].
> '°
> Cabrera v. People, 858 Phil. 14 (2019) [Per J. Reyes, Second Division].
>
> Decision 10 G.R. No. 258968
> The second punishable act is that the accused is said to have given
> unwarranted benefits, advantage, or preference to a private party. Proof of
> the extent or quantum of damage is not thus essential. It is sufficient that
> the accused has given "unjustified favor or benefit to another. "51 (Citations
> omitted)
> In this case, the prosecution established the existence of all the elements
> necessary to convict petitioner of violation of Section 3(e ) of Republic Act
> No. 3019.
> First, it is undisputed that petitioner was the Barangay Chairman of
> Barangay 404 when he obtained loans from private complainant Merza.52 By
> telling the private complainant that he needed to borrow [PHP] 100,000.00 to
> pay for the barangay's office supplies and rental expenses,53 he made it appear
> that he was discharging his official function as Barangay Chairman when in
> fact, he sought to use the money for his personal needs.
> Second, petitioner clearly acted with evident bad faith to secure the
> loans. To further the appearance that he was acting in his official capacity,
> petitioner deliberately issued an LBP check under the account name "404,
> Zone 41, District 4, Barangay Council, Manila" bearing both his signature and
> that of the barangay treasurer as security, executed the first promissory note
> indicating that the loan would be paid using the barangay's rental funds, and
> secured the attendance of the barangay treasurer and a kagawad in their
> meetings.54 Petitioner also led private complainant Merza to believe that he
> would obtain her services as a contractor for the barangay when he had no
> intention of hiring her, just so she would lend him money.55 These acts
> established that petitioner capitalized on his position as Barangay Chairman
> in bad faith and for his personal gain.
> Third, petitioner's actions caused undue injury to private complainant
> Merza. His continued failure to pay her [PHP] 198,500.00, as stated in her
> April 3, 2018 demand letter,56 affected her financial capability and deprived
> her of the use of that money.57
> As all the elements for the crime charged exist, this Court finds no
> reason to overturn the findings of the Sandiganbayan. Petitioner also failed
> to show that the Sandiganbayan "overlooked, misunderstood, or misapplied
> the surrounding facts and circumstances of the case"58 that would justify a
> conclusion otherwise.
> 51 Id. at 24.
> 52 Rollo, p. 52.
> 53 Id
> 54 Id at 49.
> " Id.
> 56 Id. at 94.
> 57 Id. at 62-64.
> 58 Ferrer, Jr. v. People, 853 Phil. 473,482 (2019) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, Second Division].
>
> Decision 11 G.R. No. 258968
> It bears noting that the facts of the case are similar to Consigna v.
> People59 where a municipal treasurer capitalized on her position to induce a
> private party to lend her money, stating that it would be used to pay for the
> salaries of the municipality's employees· and costs of construction. The
> petitioner in that case also issued three LBP checks under the municipality's
> account as guarantee. The Court affirmed her conviction of estafa and
> violation of Section 3(e) of Republic Act No. 3019.
> Similarly, in Umpa v. People,60 accused Records Officer I misled the
> private complainant to believe that she had the authority to issue the approved
> plan, the tax declaration, and the certificate of title. Relying on the
> misrepresentation, private complainant paid the accused PHP 640,000.00.
> This Court upheld the accused's conviction of both estafa and violation of
> Section 3(e) of Republic Act No. 3019 for her actions.
> Arias v. People61 and Dela Cruz v. People62 involved accused public
> officers who conspired to falsify official documents to deceive the
> Department of Public Works and Highways into paying fictitious expenses
> amounting PHP 5,166,539.00. The accused were also convicted of estafa
> through falsification of documents and violation of Section 3(e ) of Republic
> Act No. 3019.
> In Consigna,63 Umpa,64 Dela Cruz, 65 and Arias, 66 the accused were
> convicted of both estafa and violation of Section 3(e) of Republic Act No.
> 3019. However, two separate Informations were filed against the accused in
> the said cases.
> In this case, petitioner can only be convicted of one offense as only one
> Information was filed against him. Compared to estafa, Section 3(e) of
> Republic Act No. 3019 is the appropriate offense for the following reasons:
> (a) the Information uses language patterned after its elements, i.e., "public
> officer, "evident bad faith," and "undue injury;" (b) he was tried under those
> parameters; and ( c) the Regional Trial Court and Sandiganbayan convicted
> him of this crime after a finding that all of the elements were present.
> FOR THESE REASONS, the Petition for Review on Certiorari is
> DENIED. The Sandiganbayan's April 19, 2021 Decision and October 15,
> 59 731 Phil. 108 (2014) [Per J. Perez, Second Division].
> 60 898 Phil. 387 (2021) [Per J. Lopez, Third Division].
> 61 853 Phil. 407 (2019) [Per J. Peralta, Third Division].
> 62 893 Phil. 432 (2021) [Per J. Peralta, First Division].
> 63 731 Phil. 108 (2014) [Per J. Perez, Second Division].
> 64 898 Phil. 387 (2021) [Per J. Lopez, Third Division].
> 65 893 Phil. 432 (2021) [Per J. Peralta, First Division].
> 66 853 Phil. 407 (2019) [Per J. Peralta, Third Division].
>
> Decision 12 G.R. No. 258968
> 2021 Resolution in SB-20-A/R-0020 are AFFIRMED. Petitioner Danilo
> SolinaZausa is GillLTY of violating Section 3(e) of Republic Act No. 3019.
> He is sentenced to suffer the penalty of imprisonment for an indeterminate
> period of six years and one month, as minimum, to 10 years and six months,
> as maximum, with perpetual disqualification from public office. He is also
> ORDERED to PAY private complainant Gloria C. Merza [PHP] 198,500.00
> as actual damages, with legal interest of 6% per annum from finality of this
> Decision until fully paid.67
> SO ORDERED."
> WE CONCUR:
> i~t ~,.'
> e::.
> AMY ~AZ~-JAV IER
> Astociate Justice
> ~-'~~~~
> JHOSE~OPEZ
> Associate Justice Associate Justice
> 67 Lara's Gifts & Decors, Inc. v. Midtown Industries Sales, Inc., G.R. No. 225433, September 20, 2022 [Per
> J. Leon en, En Banc].
>
> ' ,, (" ' Decision 13 G.R. No. 258968
> ATTESTATION
> I attest that the conclusions in the above Decision had been reached in
> consultation before the case was assigned to the writer of the opinion of the
> Court's Division.
> \
> Senior Associate Justice
> Chairperson
> CERTIFICATION
> Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 13 of the Constitution and the Division
> Chairperson's Attestation, I certify that the conclusions in the above Decision
> had been reached in consultation before the case was assigned to the writer of
> the opinion of the Court's Division.
