# GR-277177

**Subait Guinthum Mustapha vs. Commission on Elections**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: Subait Guinthum Mustapha vs. Commission on Elections
- **Ponente**: GESMUNDO, J.
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: May 12, 2025
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2025/11/G.R.-NO.-277177-1-39.pdf)

---

> I Supreme Court oft he Philippines
> OFFICE OF THE SPOKESPERSON
> ~'~/ik~:Y!~
> I
> DGc:ument Control No.
> 3a.epublic of tbe ~bilippines
> ~upreme Ql:ourt ·
> jllla:nila:
> EN BANC
> SUBAIR GUINTHUM MUSTAPHA, G.R. No. 277177
> Petitioner,
> Present:
> GESMUNDO, CJ,
> LEONEN,
> CAGUIOA,
> HERNANDO,
> LAZARO-JAVIER,
> INTING,
> - versus - ZALAMEDA,
> GAERLAN,
> ROSARIO,*
> LOPEZ,
> DIMAAMPAO,
> MARQUEZ,
> KHO, JR.,
> . SINGH,** and
> VILLANUEVA, JJ.
> COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS,
> Respondent. Promulgated:
> DECISION
> GESMUNDO, C.J.:
> This Petition for Certiorari1 with prayer for the issuance of a temporary
> restraining order (TRO) and/or V\Tit preliminary injunction (WPI) assails the
> ' On wellness leave.
> ** Ori leave.
> 1 Rollo, pp. 3-14.
>
> Decision 2 G.R. No. 277177
> November 29,2024 Resolution2 of the Commission on Elections (CO.MELEC)
> En Banc, which affirmed the CO.MELEC Second Division's November 14,
> 2024 Omnibus Resolution3 (collectively, assailed Resolutions). The Second
> Division's Omnibus Resolution declared petitioner Subair Guinthum
> Mustapha (Mustapha) .a nuisance candidate and consequently, cancelled his
> Certificate of Candidacy4 (CoC) for the position of senator in the forthcoming
> National and Local Elections (NLE) on May 12, 2025.
> Antecedents
> On October 8, 2024, Mustapha, through an authorized representative,
> filed with the COMELEC his CoC and Certificate of Nomination and
> Acceptance5 under the Workers and Peasants Party (WPP) for the position of
> senator in the 2025 NLE.6
> In a verified rnotu proprio Petition 7 dated October 14, 2024, the
> COMELEC Law Department sought to declare Mustapha as a nuisance
> candidate and accordingly, deny due course to and/or cancel his CoC. The
> COMELEC Law Department argued that Mustapha's candidacy is merely a
> farce that puts the election process in mockery or disrepute. 8 Moreover, it
> maintained that Mustapha has no bona fide intent to run for senator.9
> In support of its arguments, the COMELEC Law Department alleged
> the following circumstances, namely: (1) Mustapha has no propensity to serve
> the public or be of service to others; 10 (2) Mustaphahas no track record of his
> advocacies or civic engagements; 11(3) Mustapha, through his representative,
> has not discussed his advocacies or platforms of government despite the
> opportunity given him immediately after the filing of his CoC on October 8,
> 2024;12 (4) Mustapha has shown no interest in engaging with the public or
> making himself known to the masses;13 and (5) Mustapha once ran for the
> 2 Id. at 86-91. The November 29, 2024 Resolution in SPA No. 24-097 (DC)(MP) was signed by Chainnan
> George Erwin M. Garcia and Commissioners Socorro B. In ting, Marlon S. CasqU:ejo, Aimee .P. Fero lino,
> Rey E. Bulay, Ernesto Ferdinand P. Maceda, Jr., and Nelson J. Celis of the Commission on Elections. En
> Banc, Intramuros, .Manila. • •
> 3 Id. at64-71. The November 14, 2024 Omnibus Resolution in SPA No. 24-098 (DC)(MP) was signed by
> Presiding Commissioner Marlon S. Casquejo and Commissioners Rey E. Bulay and Nelson L Celis _of
> the Sec·ond' DiviSion, Commission on Elections, Intramuros, Manila.
> 4 Id: at 15.
> 5 Id. at 16.
> 6 Id. at 4.
> 7 Id. at 19-31.
> 8 Id. at 24.
> 9 Id. at 27.
> 10 Id. at 24.
> 11 Id. at 25.
> 12 /d.
> 13 /d.at27.
>
> Decision 3 G.R. No. 277177
> position ofMember, House of Representatives, in the Province ofLanao del
> Sur but gained only 5,387 votes or 2.01 % of the total votes cast, suggesting
> that Mustapha's participation in the election served as more of a distraction,
> preventing the faithfuldetermination of the true will of the electorate.14
> In his Answer15 dated October 19, 2024, Mustapha denied all of the
> COJ\1ELEC Law Department's allegations ..H e averred that he is not a
> nuisance candidate and that he is a qualified and serious contender for the
> position of senator as evidenced by his academic background, leadership
> experience, . commitment to labor advocacy, and personal program of
> govemance.16
> As regards his academic background and capability, Mustapha claimed
> that he holds a law degree from Manuel L. Quezon School of Law and a
> specialization in Shari'ah Law from Mindanao State University, and earned
> units in the University of the Philippines' masteral program for Islamic
> studies, 17 He asserted. that these achievements· more than qualify him for
> senator as he is equipped with the skills necessary to address complex
> legislative matters, particularly those affecting the marginalized. communities
> and workers. 18
> On his advocacies and civic engagements, Mustapha claimed that he
> has actively participated in the labor sector, together with his co-aspirant and
> party-mate Atty. Jose Sonny Matula, who is the only remaining senatorial
> candidate of the WPP.19 He averred that he has been, and still is, actively
> involved in assisting workers. He also maintained that he is dedicated to social
> justice and to the advancement of workers' rights.20
> Anent his platforms of government, Mustapha asserted that •h e
> subscribes to the WPP' s platforms namely, the nationalization of the wage
> setting system, termination.of contractualization, regularization of long~term
> workers, and in general, the empowerment of workers through unionization
> and collective bargaining. 21 He further claimed that his personal platforms
> include the uplifting of marginalized sectors, promoting peace and
> development in Mindanao, and addressing corruption in the govemment.22
> 14 Id. at 28.
> 15 Id. at 38-45.
> 16 Id. at 39.
> 17 Id.
> 1, Id.
> Id.
> i,
> Id.
> 20
> 21 Id. at 39-40.
> 22 Id. at 40.
>
> Decision 4 G.R. No. 277177
> On his alleged failure to present his platforms of government when he
> filed his CoC, he explained that he was unable to do so because he was
> suffering from high blood pressure at that time. He argued that his
> representative's failure to explain his platform of government should not be
> taken against him. 23
> As regards his leadership, influence, and public engagement, Mustapha
> claimed th.at he is a Sultan and a recognized leader of Marawi, and thus, he
> has the respect of, and maintains a deep connection with the people he seeks
> to represent.24 He added that his role as a Sultan reinforces his capacity for
> public service and leadership.25 He posited that his party is a well-recognized
> national political party since 1963 and that it has a long-standing engagement
> in Philippine politics.26.Finally, he contended that lack of political machinery
> or financial resources are not sufficient grounds.to disqualify a candidate.as a
> nuisance candidate, and that the key consideration is the bona fide intention
> to run for public office.27
> In sum, Mustapha submitted that his legal training, his nomination by
> the WPP, his deep engagement with labor issues, his role as a Sultan, and his
> dedication to national reforms clearly reflect his bona fide intention to run for
> the position of senator.28
> On November 5, 2024, the WPP filed its Motion to Intervene.29 In. its
> Motion, the WPP alleged that it is a duly accredited and recognized national
> political party by the COMELEC since February 3, 1963. It maintained that
> since said time, it has actively participated in various national and local
> elections by itself or in alliance with other national political parties. 30
> The WPP expressed support for Mustapha and its other candidates,
> insisting that they are not nuisance candidates and asserting that they are· all
> qualified and deserving of the positions they each aspired for. It added that its
> senatorial candidates will not put the election process in mockery or disrepute,
> and that all of them have the intention and capability to run a viable campaign.
> Further, the WPP railed against the COMELEC's stance that its candidates
> have no internet media presence, as internet media is not the only vehicle by
> which a candidate promotes his or her political agenda. It explained that such
> political agenda can also be promoted through the different national
> 23 Id.
> 24 Id.
> Id.
> 2s
> 26 Id.
> 21 Id.
> 28 Id.at41.
> 29 Id. at 59-63.
> 30 Id. at 59. J
>
> Decision 5 G.R. No. 277177
> organizations and factions from which their candidates belong, WPP
> concluded that its candidates are not nuisance candidates and hence, their
> CoCs must be given due course.31
> The COMELEC consolidated the Petition against Mustapha with
> petitions against two other prospective candidates. On November 14, 2024,
> the CO:MELEC Second Division issued an Omnibus Resolution,32 declaring
> Mustapha and the two others as nuisance candidates because they purportedly
> filed their CoCs with the intent to put the election process in mockery or
> disrepute, and that they had no bona. fide intention to run for senator. The
> dispositive portion of the Second Division's Resolution reads:
> WHEREFORE; premises considered, the Commission (Second
> Division) RESOLVED, as it hereby RESOLVES to GRANT the Petitions.
> The Certificates of Candidacy of EDGARDO LIBUAN DUQUE,
> SUBAIR GUINTHUM MUSTAPHA, and.ARTEMIO MADRIDEJO
> MAQUISO are hereby CANCELLED.
> SO ORDERED.33 (Emphasis in the original)
> Explaining its ruling, the COMELEC Second Division determined that
> • the subject candidates have no serious intention to mount a nationwide
> campaign. It added that said candidates filed their CoCs merely to gain
> attention, promote a general advocacy, or to simply be noticed in the political
> sphere. 34 Likewise, the COMELEC Second Division observed that the
> candidates' behavior during the filing of their CoCs reflected their lack of
> serious intent, capability, or suitability for public office. This supposed
> behavior includes making exaggerated or frivolous promises that are patently
> unrealistic or irrelevant to the national office they seek to be elected. 35
> Furthermore, the COMELEC Second Division noted that none of the
> candidates have articulated defined agendas or policy positions, supposedly
> indicating their lack of bona fide intention to fulfill the responsibilities of the
> office they seek.36 Finally, the COMELEC Second Division found that the
> subject candidates participated in the 2022 NLE as candidates for various
> positions but received low turnout of votes. It uriderscoredthat the foregoing
> circumstances clearly displayed the subject candidates' lack of sincerity in
> 31 Id. at 61--'63.
> 32 Id. at 64-71.
> 33 Id. at 70.
> 34 Id. at 68.
> 35 Id. at 68--'69.
> 36 Id. at 69.
> ffe
>
> Decision 6 G.R. No. 277177
> their candidacy and of their intention to disrupt the election process and put it
> to mockery.37
> Aggrieved, Mustapha filed a Motion for Reconsideration38 before the
> .· COMELEC En Banc, reiterating his arguments in support of his .claim that he
> is not a nuisance candidate. 39
> On November 29, 2024, the COMELEC En Banc issued the assailed
> Resolution denying Mustapha's Motion for Reconsideration and affirming the
> COMELEC Second Division's November 14, 2024 Omnibus Resolution, viz.:
> WHEREFORE, premises considered, the Commission (En Banc)
> RESOLVED, as it hereby RESOLVES, to DENY the Motion for
> Reconsideration.
> SO ORDERED.40 (Emphasis in the original)
> Undaunted, Mustapha filed the present Petition ascribing grave abuse
> of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part of the
> COMELEC when it rendered the assailed Resolutions.
> First, he claims that the findings of the COMELEC therein were merely
> based on the speculations and conjectures made by the COMELEC Legal
> •D epartment. He insists that the COMELEC literally adopted, even without
> proof, the submissions of its Legal Department. He points out that this
> effectively shifted the burden of proof to him instead, which is contrary to the
> ruling of the Court in Marquez v. Commission on Elections 41 (Marquez
> 2022).42
> Second, he avers that his circumstances are very similar to those in
> Marquez 2022, namely: (1) he too filed a CoC which is a sworn document; (2)
> this is not the first time he filed a CoC as admitted by the COMELEC; (3) he
> was initially declared a nuisance candidate and is now seeking judicial remedy;
> ( 4) he has been very vigilant in defending his candidacy; and ( 5) he crafted
> his own program of governance to be implemented should he win the
> election. 43
> 37 Id. at 69-70.
> 38 Id. at 72-75.
> 39 Id. at 72-74.
> 40 Id. at 89-90.
> 41 924 Phil. 179 (2022) [Per J. Lazaro-Javier, En Banc].
> 42 Rollo, p. 9.
> 43 Id. at I 1.
>
> Decision 7 G.R. No. 277177
> Third, he maintains that he has adequately rebutted the allegations of
> the COMELEC Law Department by laying down his full credentials, trainings,
> activities of serving the Filipino people, and his platform of government. 44
> Finally, he criticizes as preposterous and illogical the COMELEC's
> declaration that his receipt of minimal votes during the 2022 NLE is indicative
> of his lack of sincerity in his candidacy.45
> Based on the above, Mustapha further prays for the issuance of a TRO
> and/or WPI pending the resolution of his Petition.46
> On December. l l, 2024, Mustapha filed an Urgent Motion to Issue
> Temporary Restraining Order,47 reiterating his prayer for the Court to issue a
> TRO to restrain the enforcement of the assailed Resolutions, and to order the .
> COMELEC to include his. name in the 2025 NLE ballot as an official
> candidate under the WPP for the position of senator.48 Mustapha alleges that
> the COMELEC will start printing the ballot for the 2025 NLE on December
> 13, 2024 and argues that he will suffer injustice and irreparable injury if a
> TRO will not be issued considering that a substantial number of his
> constituents in Mindanao have committed to support him.49 He states anew
> that his bona fide intent to run for senator is clear, contrary to the bare
> allegations of the COMELEC. 50
> On January 14, 2025,the Court issued a TRO51 enjoining COMELEC
> from implementing the assailed Resolutions insofar as it cancelled the CoC of
> Mustapha. for the position of senator and denied his Motion for
> Reconsideration.52 The Court likewise required Mustapha to cure the noted
> procedural defects in his Petition and directed the COMELEC to file its
> comment to said Petition.53
> On January 22, 2025, the COMELEC, through the Office of the
> Solicitor General, filed its Comment. 54 In said Comment, the COMELEC
> Id.
> 44
> 45 Id. at 12.
> 46 Id. at 12-13.
> 47 Id. at 92-96.
> 48 /d.at93.
> 49 Id. at 92-93.
> 50 Id. at 93.
> " Id. at I 11-113.
> 52 Id. at 112.
> 53 Id. at I I 1-112.
> 54 Id. at 132-150.
>
> Decision 8 G.R. No. 277177
> counters that it did not commit grave abuse of discretion, and maintains that
> Mustapha is a nuisance candidate.55
> The CO1-1ELEC states that it is vested by no less than the Constitution
> with the administration of elections, and _t hat it was endowed· with
> considerable latitude in adopting means and methods to ensure the promotion
> of free, orderly, and honest elections. 56 _It posits that no grave abuse of
> discretion can be attributed to it because it merely exercised its mandate of
> ensuring the removal of nuisance candidates. 57 Further, it asserts that the
> assailed Resolutions were based on its own appreciation of the facts vis-a vis
> 0
> the laws and jurisprudence pertinent thereto. 58 Finally, the CO1.1ELEC argues
> that even assuming that it committed an error in the appreciation of the facts,
> the same is, at best, an error in judgment and not an error of jurisdiction. 59
> The CO1-1ELEC reiterates its finding that Mustapha is a nuisance
> candidate.60 In addition, the CO1-1ELEC argues, for the first time, that the
> most obvious badge ofMustapha' s lack of bona fide intention to run for office
> and his mockery of the election process is his supposed patent lack of caution
> in making false representations in his curriculum vitae submitted to the
> CO1-1ELEC.61 The CO1-1ELEC notes the following:
> 1) Mustapha represented himself as a former assistant resident
> ombudsman in the Office of Muslim Affairs from 1990-1992.
> However, in a certification dated January 17, 2025, the Office
> of the Ombudsman stated that "there is/was no employee in
> this Office by the name • of SUBAIR GUINTHUM
> MUSTAPHA."62
> 2) Mustapha represented himself as a former
> instructor/professor of the Philippine Military Academy
> (PMA). However, in a certification dated January 15, 2025,
> the PMA stated that Mustapha was not employed as a civilian
> professor at the PMA.63
> 55 Id. at 136.
> 56 Id. at 137.
> 57 Id.
> 58 Id. at 138.
> 59 Id. at 139.
> 60 Id. at 139-142.
> 61 Id. at 142.
> 62 Id.
> 63 Id. at 143.
>
> Decision 9 G.R. No. 277177
> 3) Mustapha claimed to have served as a former government
> diplomatic attache in Ghana, Africa for a considerable length
> of time, however, in a certification from the Department of
> Foreign Affairs (DFA), it stated that there is no record of an
> individual named Subair Guinthum Mustapha in the
> Department.64
> On January 23, 2025, Mustapha filed his Compliance65 dated January
> 22, 2025 to the Court's January 14, 2025 Resolutionrequiring him to comply
> with certain procedural requirements.
> Thereafter, or on February 4, 2025, Mustapha filed his Reply66 dated
> February 3, 2025. In his Reply, Mustapha denies making false representations
> in his curriculum vitae. 67 He explains that he did not state that he was
> employed in the O:ffice of the Ombudsman, PMA, and DFA . Instead, he
> claims that he merely included them in his curriculum vitae as work
> experiences. 68 Mustapha clarifies that he worked pro bono as civilian
> instructor at the PMA, and as assistant to the resident ombudsman for Muslim
> Affairs. 69 Anent his experience with the DFA , he explains that he was locally
> hired and worked at the pleasure of the ambassadors concerned, that is why
> his engagement was not among those in the plantilla of the DFA.70 Moreover,
> Mustapha adds that as additional proof of his seriousness in running for
> senator in the forthcoming elections, he had already disseminated through his
> social media account his introduction to the public. 71 He avers that last
> January 22, 2025, he was interviewed in the TV program Balitaan, where he
> was asked regarding his program of governance.72 Moreover, he alleges that
> he has been invited as guest speaker in several conferences, one of which is
> the 29th A warding Ceremony and Grand Academic Convocation by the
> International Academy of Leadership and Management held last February 1,
> 2025 at Aberdeen Hotel, Quezon City.73
> Issue
> Did the COMELEC commit grave abuse of discretion amounting to
> lack or excess of jurisdiction when it declared Mustapha a nuisance candidate
> Id.
> 64
> 65 Id. at 151-157.
> 66 Id. at 159-163.
> 67 Id. at 161.
> 68 Id.
> 69 Id.
> 10 Id.
> 71 Id. at 162.
> 72 Id.
> 73 Id.
>
> Decision G.R. No. 277177
> resulting in the cancellation of his CoC for the position of senator in the 2025
> NLE?
> The Court's Ruling
> At the outset, the Court states that the Petition has been rendered moot
> and academic.
> A case is moot and academic when it .ceases to present a justiciable
> controversy by virtue of supervening events, so that a declaration thereon
> would be of no practical value. 74 In this case, Mustapha seeks to nullify the
> COMELEC's decfarationthat he is a nuisance candidate and the consequent
> cancellation of his COC. However, with the conclusion of the 2025 NLE and
> the proclamation of the 12 senatorial candidates who received the highest
> number of votes, Mustapha excluded, it is beyond cavil that a declaration
> herein would be of no practical value to the parties. Thus, the case is now
> moot and academic.
> As a rule, a cow-t would normally decline jurisdiction over a case when
> it becomes moot and academic, as "its resulting judgment will not serve any
> useful purpose or have any practical legal effect because, in the nature of
> things, it cannot be enforced." 75 Nonetheless, courts may decide cases
> otherwise moot and academic if:first, there is a grave violation of the
> Constitution; second, the exceptional character of the situation and the
> paramount public interest is involved; third, when the constitutional issue
> raised requires formulation of controlling principles to guide the bench, the
> bar, and the public; or fourth, the case is capable of repetition yet evading
> review.76
> The Court finds that this petition falls under the fourth exception, as it
> is a case capable of repetition yet evading review.77 As observed by the Court
> in De Alban v. Commission on Elections, 78 "elections are held at regular
> intervals and the issues of nuisance candidates will inescapably reach the
> Court."79 Thus, in view of the issue's susceptibility of recurrence, the Court
> will proceed to resolve the present case on its merits. By elucidating further
> on the meaning, scope, and application of Section 69 of the Omnibus Election
> 74 Oc/arino v. Navarro, 863 Phil. 949,955 (2019) [Per J. Reyes, J. Jr., Second Division].
> 75 National Electrification Administration v. Borja, 961 Phil. 22, 26 (2024) [Per J. Dimaampao, Third
> Division]; citing Philippine Veterans Bank v. Court ofA ppeals, 928 Phil. 907, 910 (2022) [Per J. Kho,
> k, Second Division].
> 76 De Alban v. Commission on Elections, 921 Phil. 524,528 (2022) [Per J. Lopez, M., En Banc].
> 77 See Marquez.v. Commission on Elections, 861 Phil. 667 (2019) [Per J. Jardeleza, En Banc].
> 78 921 Phil. 524 (2022) [Per J. Lopez, M., En Banc].
> 79 Id. at 528.
>
> Decision 11 G.R. No. 277177
> Code (OEC), the Court trusts that the COMELEC will. be provided with
> clearer guidance on how to better execute its mandate of ensuring and
> promoting fair, honest, and credible elections.
> The Court rules that the COMELEC committed grave abuse of
> discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction when it declared
> Mustapha a nuisance candidate resulting in the cancellation of his CoC for the
> position of senator in the 2025 NLE. As will be further explained below, the
> assailed Resolutions were issued in violation of the due process requirements
> in quasi-judicial proceedings. The assailed Resolutions were not supported by
> substantial evidence, were issued without considering the evidence submitted
> by Mustapha, and were couched in sweeping and general statements making
> it difficult, if not impossible, for Mustapha to know which of the
> COMELEC's findings apply or pertain to him.
> The COMELEC, in declaring Mustapha as a nuisance candidate, relied
> on the unsubstantiated allegations of its law department. In essence, the
> COMELEC again employed a "cookie-cutter'' motion, a practice already
> condemned by the Court in the recent cases of Marquez 2022; Marquez v.
> Commission on Elections80 (Marquez 2019); and Ollesca v. Commission on
> Elections.81 Moreover, the COMELEC failed to give due consideration on the
> evidence and arguments presented by Mustapha. It should be remembered that
> in a Section 69 proceeding under the OEC, the COMELEC serves a dual role
> - that of a petitioner and a quasi-judicial agency.
> It is settled that when a lower court or tribunal renders a Decision that
> is patently inconsistent with existing jurisprudence, or in disregard of the
> parties' right to due process, it commits grave abuse of discretion.82
> The Court is mindful of the COMELEC's mandate to promote fair,
> honest, and credible elections, and appreciates its desire to eliminate nuisance
> candidates from the ballot. The Court is likewise mindful of the reality that
> there cannot be an honest, fair, and credible election if its very foundation ~
> the right to vote and be voted for - does not get the strongest protection it
> rightfully deserves. Thus, the Court hereby restates the legal principles
> underlying the right to candidacy and the proper application of Section 69 of
> the OEC, particularly on a candidate's lack of bona fide intent to run for public
> office.
> 80 861 Phil. 667 (2019) [Per J. Jardeleza, En Banc].
> 81 956 Phil. 889 (2024) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
> 82 Spouses Abayon v. Bank oft he Philippine Islands. 939 Phil. 347, 356 (2023) [Per J. Dimaampao, Third
> Division]; De Alban v. Commission on Elections, 921 Phil. 524, 550'-55 I (2022) [Per J. Lopez, M., En
> Banc].
>
> Decision 12 G.R. No. 277177
> I. The Right to Candidacy
> To run for an elective office, herein simply referred to as candidacy, is
> a right.83 It is not simply a privilege that is subject to whatever limitations
> imposed by law.84 It is not a concession by the State, but one enjoyed by every
> qualified citizen who lives in a democracy such as ours. 85
> While candidacy is properly categorized as a right, it is settled that it is
> not a fundamental right. 86 As such, it may be regulated or restricted by the
> 83 The right to candidacy has been recognized in this jurisdiction just as the same time as our ancestors
> chose a democratic form of government - a government whose authority emanates from the people. In
> Maquera v. Borra, 122 Phil. 412, 414-415 (1965) [Per Curiam, En Banc], the Court aptly declared that
> the right to be voted for is available to all citizens, rich or poor alike. Accordingly, this is consistent with
> the principle on which our democratic government is premised that sovereignty resides in the people and
> all government authority emanates from them, thus: •
> That said property qualifications are inconsistenn¥ith the nature and essence of the
> Republican system ordained in our Constitution and the principle of social justice underlying
> the same,for said political system is premised upon the tenet that sovereignty resides in tlie
> people and all government authority emanates from them, and tl,is, in turn, implies
> necessarily that the right to vote and to be voted for shall not be dependent upon thi wealth
> oft he individual concerned, whereas socialjustice presupposes equal opportunity for all, rich
> and poor alike, and that, accordingly, no person shall, by reason of poverty, be denied the chance
> to be elected to public office. (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
> The pronouncement.of the Court in Maquera that candidacy is a right has since been reiterated in
> subsequent cases such as 01/esca v. Commission on Elections, 956 Phil. 889 (2024) [Per L Leonen, En
> Banc] and Cipriano v. Commission on Elections, 479 Phil. 677 (2004) [Per J. Puno, En Banc]. See also
> Timbol v. Commission on Elections, 754 Phil. 578 (2015) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc]; Sobejana-Condon
> v. Commission on Elections, 692 Phil. 407 (2012) [Per J. Reyes, En Banc]; and Moreno v. Commission
> on Elections, 530 Phil. 279 (2006) [Per J. Tioga, En Banc].
> Our treatment of candidacy as a right is also consistent with the international agreements of which
> the Philippines is a party namely, the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the
> 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).
> Article 2, Section 2 of the UDHR states that "[e]veryone has the right of equal access to public
> service in his country." On the other hand, Article 25 of the ICCPR provides that "[ e] very citizen shall
> have the right and the opportunity, [w ithout distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language,
> religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status] and without
> unreasonable restrictions, [t]o vote and to be elected at genuine and periodic elections[.]"
> In Macalintal v. Commission on Elections, 943 Phil. 212 (2023) [Per J. Kho, Jr., En Banc], the Court
> held that the UDHR and the ICCPR are binding on the Philippines and have thus the force of domestic
> law iri this jurisdiction. (Id. at 231-232.)
> 84 In the case of Pamatongv. Commission on Elections, 470 Phil. 711, 716 (2004) [PerJ. Tinga, En Banc],
> the Court categorized candidacy as a privilege subject to limitations imposed by law. This
> pronouncement of the Court in Pamatong has been reiterated in the subsequent cases of Albano v.
> Commission on Elections, 934 Phil. 343,362 (2023) [Per J. Lopez, J_, En Banc]; Marquezv. Commission
> on Elections, 861 Phil. 667, 686 (2019) [Per J. Jardeleza, En Banc]; and Timbol v. Commission on
> Elections, 754 Phil. 578, 586 (2015) [Per J_ Leonen, En Banc].
> This notwithstanding, the Court has consistently treated candidacy as no less than a right. This is
> very clear from the Court's discussions in the same cases where it categorized candidacy as a privilege,
> and from the strong protection it has accorded to political candidacy.
> 85 See Maquerav. Borra, 122 Phil. 412,415 (1965) [Per Curiam, En Banc]; Article 21, UDHR, December
> 10, 1948; Article 25, ICCPR, December 16, 1966.
> 86 In the case of Pamatongv. Commission on Elections, 470 Phil. 711, 716 (2004) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc],
> the Court categorized candidacy as simply a privilege subject to limitations imposed by law. This
> pronouncement of the Court in Pamatong has been reiterated in the subsequent cases of De Alban v.
> Commission on Elections, 921 Phil. 524, 543 (2022) [Per J. Lopez, M., En Banc]; Marquez v.
> Commission on Elections, 861 Phil. 667, 686 (2019) [Per J. Jardeleza, En Banc]; and Timbol v.
> Commission on Elections, 754 Phil. 578, 586 (2015) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
> f
>
> Decision 13 G.R. No. 277177
> State to achieve a legitimate and compelling State interest. Thus, as correctly
> . observed by Senior Associate Justice Marvic M.V.F. Leanen, candidacy has
> been restricted not only by the Constitution, but .also by statutes passed by
> Congress, viz.:
> While the Constitution guarantees "equal access to opportunities for
> public service," it could never be the intent to allow just any one to run. The
> aspirant must possess the qualifications and eligibilities required for the
> public office sought. ... Congress, in the exercise of its plenary legislative
> power, prescribes conditions for the exercise of the right to run for office
> and additional qualifications and disqualifications for elective office,
> consistentwith the Constitution. 87 (Citation omitted)
> It must be stressed, however, that any such limitation or restriction to
> the right to candidacymust be reasonable andnon-discriminatory.88 Moreover,
> such limitations and/or restrictions must be properly and conscientiously
> enforced or implemented.
> II. Nuisance candidacy a
> reasonable restriction to the
> right to candidacy
> In our jurisdiction, nuisance candidacy is a settled reasonable restriction
> to the right to candidacy.89 Nuisance candidacy is governed by and clearly
> defined in Section 69 of the OEC, viz.:
> Section 69. Nuisance candidates. - The Commission may, motu
> proprio or upon a verified petition of an interested party, refuse to give due
> course to or cancel. a certificate of candidacy if it is shown that said
> certificate has been filed to put the election process in mockery or disrepute
> or to cause confusion among the voters by the similarity of the names ofthe
> registered candidates or by other circumstances or acts which clearly
> demonstrate that the candidate has no bona fide intention to run for the
> office for which the certificate of candidacy has been filed and thus prevent
> a faithful determination of the true will of the electorate.
> 87 J. Leonen, Concuning Opinion.
> 88 See Albano v. Commission on Elections, 934 Phil. 343 (2023) [Per J. Lopez, J., En Banc]; UN
> Declaration, ICCPR.
> 89 Even prior to reaching our statute books, nuisance candidacy has already been perceived as an evil to be
> remedied. In the early case of Alvear v .. Commission on Elections, I 03 Phil. 643 (1958) [Per J. Bautista,
> En Banc], the Court cited the case of Garcia v. Imperial, G.R. No. L-12930, October 22, 1957,
> concerning the presidential candidacy of Ciriaco S. Garcia. The Court did not give due course to the
> candidacy of Garcia stating that his candidacy was filed merely to create confusion in the mind of the
> electorate and of the election inspectors, and not to win the election. For a scholarly exposition of the
> history· of nuisance ·candidacy in this• jurisdiction, see Paolo Cel6ridad, Nuisance Candidacies in
> Philippine Election Lo:w: Legal History, Legal Analysis, and Legal Reform, 94 Phil. L.J. 752 (2021).
>
> Decision 14 G.R. No. 277177
> In Pamatong v. Commission on Elections,90 the Court described the
> compelling state interest that justifies the prohibition against nuisance
> candidates. The Court stated that there are practical considerations in the
> conduct of elections, such that the greater the number of candidates, the
> greater the opportunities for logistical confusion.
> The rationale behind the prohibition against nuisance candidates and
> the disqualification of candidates who have not evinced a [bona fide]
> intention to run for office is easy to divine. The State has a compelling
> interest to ensure that its electoral exercises are rational, objective, and
> orderly. Towards this end, the State takes into account the practical
> considerations in conducting elections. Inevitably, the greater the number
> of candidates, the greater the opportunities for logistical confusion, not to
> mention the increased allocation of time and resources in preparation for the
> election. These practical difficulties should, of course, never exempt the
> State from the conduct of a mandated electoral exercise. At the same time,
> remedial actions should be available to alleviate these logistical hardships,
> whenever necessary and proper. Ultimately, a disorderly election is not
> merely a textbook example of inefficiency, but a rot that erodes faith in our
> democratic institutions.
> The organization of an election with [bona fide] candidates standing is
> onerous enough. To add into the mix canq.idates with no serious intentions
> or capabilities to run a viable campaign would actually impair the electoral
> process. This is not to mention the candidacies which are palpably
> ridiculous so as to constitute a one-note joke. The poll body would be
> bogged by irrelevant minutiae covering every step of the electoral process,
> most probably posed at the instance of these nuisance candidates. It would
> be a senseless sacrifice on the part of the State.
> Owing to the superior interest in ensuring a credible and orderly
> election, the State could exclude nuisance candidates and need .not indulge
> in, as the song goes, "their trips to the moon on gossamer wings."91
> The same justification of the restriction was stressed in the recent case
> of Ollesca, to wit:
> It is imperative to recognize and uphold the fundamental democratic
> principle that a citizen has the right to participate in the electoral processes
> by running for public office. However, this right must be harmonized with
> the practical constraints faced by COMELEC, with respect to overseeing
> and ensuring a "free, orderly, honest, peaceful and credible elections."
> 90 470 Phil. 711 (2004) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc].
> 91 Id. at 719-721. I
>
> Decision 15 G.R. No. 277177
> The sheer volwne of candidates poses logistical challenges,
> potentially leading to an unwieldy ballot and hampering the electorate's
> ability to make informed choices. COMELEC must streamline the electoral
> process while simultaneously allowing a fair and accessible competition
> among candidates by effectively managing its resources and reducing voter
> confusion through its ability to regulate a finite nwnber of candidates and a
> manageable ballot.92 (Citation omitted)
> Considering the aforementioned •1 egitimate State interest, it is
> reasonable for the State to cancel or deny due course to the CoCs of those
> candidates who have not shown any bona fide intention to run for public office,
> . or those whose only intention in filing their CoCs is to put the election process
> into mockery or disrepute.
> Ill. . Present and proper application
> of the restriction
> As previously intimated, the protection accorded to the right to
> candidacy does not end with the assurance that the restrictions thereto are
> reasonable and non-discriminatory. The protection extends to ensuring that
> valid restrictions on the right are properly and conscientiously applied by the
> agencies primarily tasked with enforcing the same. This is so because a
> misapplication of a valid restriction impairs the right to candidacy just as
> . seriously and effectively as when the restriction is not valid at all.
> A. COMELEC, as the petitioner in
> Section. 69, must prove by
> substantial evidence that the
> candidate is a nuisance
> candidate
> Under Section 69 ofthe OEC, the COMELEC may, motu proprio or
> upon a verified petition, declare candidates as nuisance and consequently,
> disqualify them from participating in the election. While Section 69 allows
> two distinct modes of initiating the process of declaring a candidate nuisance,
> it nonetheless imposes uniform conditions and/or requirements before a
> candidate is ultimately declared as such. lh other words, whether the process
> is commenced via a verified petition by interested parties or via a verified
> petition by the COMELEC in the exercise of its power to commence the
> process on its own initiative, Section 69 requires the petitioner in either case
> to adduce evidence showing that the respondent is a nuisance candidate. This
> 92 O/lesca v. Commission on Elections, 956 Phil. 889, 895--896 (2024) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
>
> Decision 16 G.R. No. 277177
> is clear not only from.the text93 of Section 69, but also from the deliberations
> of the members ofCongress94 who voted in favor of its present formulation or
> wordings.
> Thus, the CO:MELEC, as a petitioner in Section 69, must "prove, by •
> substantial evidence, that the candidacy of [the candidate] falls within any of
> the three (3) grounds provided in Section 69 of the Omnibus Election Code."95
> "When the [COl'vfELEC] fails to show in a satisfactory manner the facts upon
> which· [it] bases [its] claims, the [respondent-candidate] is under no obligation
> to prove [his or her] exception or defense."96 Inthe event that the COl'vIELEC,
> in its capacity as petitioner, fails to discharge its burden, then the COl'vIELEC,
> sitting as a tribunal, is duty bound to dismiss the motu proprio petition and
> sustain the respondent-candidate's candidacy.
> B. The COMELEC, acting as a
> tribunal in Section 69
> proceedings, must comply with
> the requirements of
> administrative due process
> Once a verified petition to declare a candidate nuisance is filed either
> by an interested party or by the COl'vIELEC motu proprio, the COl'vIELEC
> shall resolve such petition in its capacity as a quasi-judicial tribunal.
> As a quasi-judicial tribunal, the COl'vIELEC must thus observe the due
> process requirements in quasi-judicial proceedings,.namely: (l).it must afford
> the parties appearing before it an opportunity to be heard and to submit
> evidence in support of their assertions; (2) it must consider the evidence
> presented; (3) its decision must be based on the evidence presented at the
> hearing, or at least contained in the record and disclosed to the parties affected;
> (4) its decision must be based on substantial evidence; (5) it must act on its
> own. independent consideration. of the law and the facts of the case, and not
> simply accept the views of a subordinate; (6) it must render its decision in
> such manner that the parties to the proceedings can know the various issues
> involved and reasons for its decision.97
> •
> 93 The provision uses the words "shownn and "clearly demonstrates",, indicating the intent of Congress to
> require the presentation of evidence establishing that a candidate i~ a nuisance under any or all of the
> three categOries.
> 94 IV Record, House 99th Congress, 2nd Session, 1874-1878 (Febmary 20, 1985).
> 95 Marquez v. Commission on Elections, 924 Phil. 179, 193 (2022) [PerJ. Lazaro-Javier, En Banc].
> 96 Id. at 192-193.
> 97 .Tolentino v. Commission on Elections, 631 Phil. 568, 589 (2010) [Per J. Bersamin, En Banc], citing Ang
> Tibay v. Court ofI ndustrial Relations, 69 Phil. 635, 642--{i44 (1940) [Per J. Laurel, En Banc].
>
> Decision 17 G.R. No. 277177
> The COMELEC Divisions, and eventually the COMELEC En Ba'nc,
> must ensure that parties appearing before it are afforded an opportunity to be
> heard. This means.giving the parties a chance "to explain [their] side or an
> opportunity to seek a reconsideration of the action or ruling complained of."98
> This is especially true withrespect to the respondent whose candidacy is at
> stake. Thus, in Timbol v. Commission on Elections,99 the Court ruled that the
> "[COMELEC] commits grave abuse of discretion ifit denies due course to or
> cancels a certificate of candidacy without affording the candidate an
> opportunity to be heard."100
> Of course, the COMELEC should not simply afford the parties an
> opportunity to be heard andto submit evidence in support of their assertions;
> it must also consider the parties' arguments and evidence in arriving at its
> decision. The COMELEC cannot simply adopt the submissions of one party
> without considering those of the opposing side. Otherwise, the entire
> requirement of affording the parties the opportunity to be heard and to submit
> evidence will be rendered useless and meaningless. "The right to .adduce
> evidence, without the corresponding duty on the part of the board to consider
> it, is vain. Such right is conspicuously futile if the person or persons to whom
> the evidence is presented can thrust it aside without notice or
> consideration."101
> Additionally, theCOMELEC must confine its findings to the evidence
> presented and submitted by the parties, or to the evidence contained in the
> records that were previously disclosed to the parties affected. "Only by
> confining [itself] to the evidence disclosed to the parties, can the latter be
> protected in their right to know and meet the case against them."102
> Moreover, the COMELEC, acting as a tribunal, must ensure that its
> findings and conclusions are supported by substantial evidence. "Substantial
> evidence is more than a mere scintilla, [but] such relevant evidence as a
> reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion."103 As the
> Court held in Uy v. Commission on Elections, 104 the COMELEC cannot
> "perfunctorily invoke the evil caused by nuisance candidates without adequate
> " Timbol v. Commission on Elections, 754 Phil. 578, 587 (2015) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc], citing Trinidad
> v, Commission on Elections, 373 Phil. 802, 811 (1999) [Per J. Ynares-Santiago, En Banc].
> 99 754 Phil. 578 (2015) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
> 100 Id: at 588.
> 101 Ang Tibay v. Court ofI ndustrial Relations, 69 Phil. 635, 642 (1940) [Per J. Laurel, En Banc].
> 102 Id. at 643.
> rn3 Id. at 642.
> 104 945 Phil. 446 (2023) [Per J. Lopez, M., En Banc].
>
> Decision 18 G.R. No. 277177
> proof to support a conclusion that a. candidate 1s a nmsance in the first
> place."105
> Therefore, the COMELEC, sitting as a tribunal, must act on its own
> independent consideration of the law and the facts of the case, and not simply
> accept the views of its Law Department or such other office, committee, or
> officer deputized to gather evidence 9r to perform the duties of initiating a
> motu proprio petition. The .COMELEC must bear in mind that when
> exercising its quasi-judicial powers, it is acting as an independent tribunal,
> theoretically and operationally, detached from any of its officers or
> departments and acting in their respective capacities as petitioner or party in
> an election case or proceeding.
> Finally, the COMELEC must render its decision in such manner that
> the parties to the proceedings can know the various issues involved and
> reasons for its decision. As much as possible, it should refer to that portion of
> the records or cite the relevant and materral evidence supporting its findings
> or conclusion. It should attempt to be specific as much as possible, especially
> in consolidated cases. That is to say, the COMELEC must specify the
> violations, acts, omissions, or circumstances committed by, attendant to, or
> applicable to each party.
> If the COMELEC's decision or resolution is noncompliant with any of
> the aforementioned requirements, thereby denying the parties' right to
> procedural due process, then such decision or resolution is issued with grave.
> abuse of discretion.
> The COMELEC, in its capacity as petitioner in a Section 69 proceeding,
> bears the burden of proving its assertion that the candidate it seeks to
> disqualify is a nuisance candidate. It must adduce substantial evidence and not
> merely rely on bare allegations. In tum, the COMELEC, in its capacity as a
> • tribunal, must comply with the due process requirements in quasicjudicial
> proceedings.
> C. What constitutes nuisance
> candidacy
> Dissecting Section 69 of the OEC, the Court ruled in Amad v.
> Commission on Elections 106 that there are three grounds for declaring a
> candidate as a nuisance candidate, namely: (1) that such candidate only filed
> 105 Id. at 477.
> 106 924. Phil. 861 (2022) [Per Jc Gaerlan, En Banc].
> lf
>
> Decision 19 G.R. No. 277177
> his or her CoC to put the election process in. mockery or to cause disrepute;
> (2) that such candidate only filed his or her CoG to cause confusion among
> the voters; and (3) that there exists circumstances that clearly demonstrate that
> the candidate has no bona fide intention to run for office to prevent a faithful
> 107
> determination of the true will of the electorate.
> In De Alban the Court ruled that the common thread of the three
> instances is .that nuisance candidates filed their CoCs not to aspire or seek
> public office but to prevent "a faithful determination oft he true will of the
> electorate." 108 Elsewise stated, "the pivotal criterion that characterizes a
> nuisance candidate lies in the absence of a [bona fide] intent to run for public
> o:ffice."109 •
> Further clarifying the meaning of a candidate's bona fide intent to run
> for public office, the Court in Marquez 2019 explained that bona fide intent
> to run for office should not be confused with lack of financial capacity to wage
> 10
> a 11ational campaign.1 Accordingly, to use lack off inancial capacity to wage
> a national campaign as a yardstick in determining a candidate's seriousness to
> run for office is tantamount to imposing property qualifications on the right to
> run for public office. 111
> It must be stressed that the imposition of property 11equirements upon
> an aspirant for public office is constitutionally impermissible. In his
> Concurring Opinion in Maquera v. Borra, 112 former Chief Justice Cesar
> Bengzon aptly explained the rationale therefor.
> The Constitution, in providing for the qualification of Congressmen,
> sets forth only age, citizenship, voting and residence qualifications. No
> property qualification of any kind is thereunder required. Since the effect of
> Republic Act No. 4421 is to require of candidates for Congress a substantial
> property qualification, and to disqualify those who do not meet the same, it
> goes against the provision of the Constitution which, in line with its
> 107 Id. at 872.
> ws De Alban v. Commission on Elections, 921 Phil. 524, 533-534 (2022) [Per J. Lopez, M., En Banc].
> 109 01/esca v. Commission on Elections, 956 Phil. 889, 905 (2024) [Per J. Leanen, En Banc].
> 110 Marquez v. Commission on Elections, 861 Phil. 667,673,686 (2019) [Per J. Jardeleza, En Banc].ln said
> case, the COMELEC _filed a motu proprio petition to declare Marquez a nuisance candidate alleging·that
> he was "virtually unknown to the entire country except maybe in the locality where he resides" and that
> "though a real estate broker, he, absent clear proof of financial capability, will not be able to sustain the
> financial rigors of a nationwide campaign." We ruled that COMELEC may not use lack of proof of
> financial capac.ity to sustain the financial rigors of waging a nationwide campaign, by itself, as a ground
> to declare an aspirant for senator a nuisance candidate.
> 111 See also the cases of Marquez v. Commission on Elections, 924 Phil. 179, 192 (2022) [Per J. Lazaro
> Javier, En Banc]; De Alban v. Commission on Elections, 921 Phil. 524, 547-548 (2022) [Per J. Lopez,
> M.,
> En Banc]; and Maquera v. Borra, 122 Phil. 412, 419-A20 (1965) [Per Curiam, En Banc].
> 112 122 Phil. 412 (1965) [Per Curiam, En Banc].
>
> Decision 20 G.R. No. 277177
> democratic character, requires no property qualification for the right to hold
> said public office.
> Freedom of the voters to exercise the elective .franchise at a general
> election implies the right to freely choose froni all qualified candidates for
> public office, Toe imposition of unwarranted restrictions and hindrances
> precluding qualified candidates from running, is, therefore, violative of the
> constitutional guaranty of freedom in the exercise of elective franchise. It
> seriously interferes with .the right of the. electorate to choose freely from
> among those eligible to office whomever they may desire.
> Nuisance candidates, as an evil to be remedied, do not justify the
> adoption of measures that would bar poor candidates from running for office.
> Republic Act 4421 in fact enables rich candidates, whether nuisance or not,
> to present themselves for election. Consequently, it cannot be sustained as
> a valid regulation of elections to secure the expression of the popular will. 113
> Subsequently, the Court in Marquez 2022 ruled that circumstances such
> as (1) candidate's lack of ability to make himself or herselfknown to the entire
> country and the electorate; (2) candidate's .lack of a nationwide network or
> organization of supporters to assist him or her during the campaign; (3)
> candidate's incapability to persuade a substantial number of voters in different
> parts ofthe country; and (4) candidate's lack of political machinery; are
> substantially the same as the circumstance that the candidate lacks financial
> capacity to wage a national campaign. Accordingly, when these circumstances
> were used by the C01\1ELEC in Marquez 2022, they were exposed as
> "shrouded property qualifications" and are thus proscribed under the
> Constitution.114
> Then, in De Alban, the Court also ruled that non-membership in a
> political party, or being unknown nationwide, or a candidate's low probability
> of getting elected, or a candidate's circumstance of being a first-time
> candidate, do not equate to the absence of a bona fide intent to run for public
> office, viz.:
> In the same vein, the Court finds that non-membership in a political party
> or being unknown nationwide, or the low probability of success do not by
> themselves equate to the absence of bona fide intention to run. for public
> office under Section 69 of the OEC. Membership in a political party is not
> a requirement to run for senator under the current electoral framework while
> non-membership does not prevent a faithful determination of the will of the
> electorate. Also, the candidate's degree of success is irrelevant to [bona
> 113 Id. at 420-421.
> "' Marquez v. Commission on Elections, 924 Phil. 179, 190-192 (2022) [Per J. Lazaro-Javier, En Banc].
>
> Decision 21 G.R. No. 277177
> fide] intention to run for public office. A candidate "has no less a right to
> run when he faces prospects ofdefeat as when he expected to.win." Neither
> the candidate's act of participating for the first time in elections be equated
> with the absence of good faith. The Court had overruled the Comelec's
> postulation that a [bona fide] intention to run for public office is absent if
> there is no "tiniest chance to obtain the favorable indorsement of a
> substantial portion oft he electorate."115 (Emphasis in the original, citations
> omitted)
> The afore-quoted pronouncement in De Alban is an affirmation of the
> Court's rationale in Marquez 2022 on why a candidate's popularity or lack
> thereof cannot be a criterion in determining his or her bona fide intent to run
> for public office. The Court in Marquez 2022, through Associate .Justice Amy
> C. LazarolJavier, emphatically articulated. such rationale in this wise:
> .[D]eclaring one a nuisance candidate simply because he or she is not
> known to the entire country reduces the electoral process-a sacred
> instrument of democracy-to a mere popularity contest. The matter of the
> candidate. being known (or unknown) should not be taken against that
> candidate but is best left to the electorate. As it is, our democratic and
> republican state is based on effective representation. Thus, the electorate's
> choices must be protected and respected.116
> The Court adds that the OEC's provision of a 60 to 90-day period,
> during which candidates are supposed to introduce themselves and their
> platforms of government, supports the conclusion that popularity and
> winnability were not intended by Congress to be a criterion in determining
> whether a candidate is a nuisance. In other words, that the law gives
> candidates a 60 to 90-day period to make themselves "known" and increase
> their "winnability"is a plain indication that unpopular or unknown candidates,
> or candidates with low chances of winning, are not necessarily nuisance
> candidates. This is so because one of the evident purposes of the two to three
> month long campaign period is precisely to give legitimate yet unpopular
> candidates a time to make themselves and their platforms of government
> known, and consequently, increase their chances of getting elected in office.
> As keenly observed by Senior Associate Justice Leonen:
> Indeed, the law prescribes a 90-day campaign period - a getting to
> know - so anyone whether rich or poor or popular or not, can be given the
> opportunity to become known and to convince the voters that they are the
> best choice. During this period, the candidates engage in numerous
> activities to push for their election and respective platforms. Such activities
> include attending public rallies, distributing campaign materials, doing door
> to door campaigning and motorcades, delivering political pitches and
> 115 De Alban v. Commission on Elections, 921 Phil. 524, 549 (2022) [Per J. Lopez, M., En Banc].
> 116 Marquez v. Commission on Elections, 924 Phil 179, 195 (2022) [Per J. Lazaro-Javier, En Banc].
>
> Decision 22 G.R. No.277177
> through social media platforms. Itis in this critical period where the voting
> public come to lmow the official candidates, what they stand for and what
> their plans are.
> At this time, people are most engaged in political discourse. Citizens
> . seek information on candidates and, in turn, campaign and persuade other
> people to likewise vote for their candidate.117 (Citation omitted)
> To reiterate, the provision on campaign periodis a manifest indication
> of the legislators' intent not to consider unpopular or unknown candidates as
> nuisance. In fact, such provision is a recognition of the reality that candidates
> with bona fide intent to run for public office are not always popular and may
> thus need a wide window through which they make themselves known and
> resultantly persuade the electorate into electing them in office. Needless to
> state, our history of electoral exercises is teeming with examples of initially
> unpopular candidates .who, through their diligent and persistent efforts in
> making themselves known during the campaign period, eventually persuaded
> the electorate and got themselves elected in office.
> Just recently, the Court reiterated in Ollesca its rulings in Marquez 2019,
> Marquez 2022, and De Alban that (a) financial capacity should not be
> conflated with the bona fide intention to run for public office; and (b) the
> imposition of having financial capacity to hit the campaign trail is a property
> qualification that is prohibited under the Constitution and is likewise not a
> valid ground to declare a candidate as nuisance_ll8
> In sum, the foregoing recent Court pronouncements provide thatwhen
> confronted ·w ith the question on whether a candidate is legitimate or a
> nuisance, the COl\1ELEC must investigate and consider the purpose of the
> candidate's filing of his or her CoC. The COl\1ELEC must determine whether
> a candidate filed his or her CoC for the purpose of seeking elective office, or
> merely to gain attention, promote a general advocacy, or simply be noticed in
> the political sphere. Additionally, the COl\1ELEC must look into whether the
> candidate filed his or her CoC in good faith, or only for the purpose of
> deceiving the voters, mocking the election process, or preventing a faithful
> determination of the will of the electorate.
> In determining whether a candidate lacks bona fide intent to run for
> public office, the COl\1ELEC must consider only those acts and/or
> circumstances that CLEARLY demonstrate such lack of bona fide intent. The
> COl\1ELEC must not SOLELY rely on circumstances that are remotely
> related to or faintly indicative of a candidate's bona fide intent to run for
> 117 J. Leonen, Concurring Opinion.
> 118 Ollesca v. Commission on Elections, 956 Phil. 889, 905 (2024) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc].
>
> Decision 23 G.R. No. 277177
> public office. Finally, the CO:MELEC must NOT consider such acts and/or
> circumstances that effectively impose property qualifications, or such acts
> and/or circumstances that have no bearing or direct relation to a candidate's
> seriousness. to run for public office such as popularity, degree of success in
> the elections, or having received minimal votes in the previous elections.
> Of course, in making its determination in accordance with the foregoing
> discussions, the CO:MELEC must tread with utmost caution. The CO:MELEC
> must thoroughly assess all the circumstances to avoid an erroneous finding of
> nuisance candidacy. Before declaring a candidate nuisance, the CO:MELEC
> must have been completely convinced that the absence of bona fide intent to
> run for public office is evident and clearly demonstrated.119 These impositions
> upon the CO:MELEC are all consistent with its mandate to protect and
> promote the constitutional guarantees of equal access to opportunities for
> public service, including the right to candidacy.
> IV. Application of the above
> principles to the facts of the
> case
> In this case, the CO:MELEC argues that Mustapha's · candidacy is
> merely a farce that puts the election process in mockery or disrepute, and that
> he had no bona fide intention to run for senator.
> In particular, the CO:MELEC Law Department alleged: (1) the absence
> of even a modicum of indication ofMustapha' s propensity to serve the pubHc
> or be part of service to others; (2) that Mustapha failed to introduce and/or
> discuss his political platforms or agenda upon filing his CoC; (3) that
> Mustapha Jacks any track record of advocacies or civic engagement,
> indicative of his unwillingness to commit to the rigors of campaigning and
> public service; (4) that Mustapha lacks interest in making himself known to
> the masses and lacks .social media presence; (5) that Mustapha once ran for
> the position of Member, House of Representatives, in the Province ofLanao
> del Sur but gained only 5,387 votes or 2.01% of the total votes cast; and (6)
> that Mustapha lacks substantial public support ..
> In the assailed Omnibus Resolution, the CO:MELEC Second Division
> found that the behavior of Mustapha and his fellow candidates during the
> filing of their respective CoCs reflected their lack of serious intent, capability,
> or suitability for public office. This supposed behavior pertained to their acts
> 119 See De Alban v. Commission on Elections, 921 Phil. 524, 546-548 (2022) [Per J. Lopez, M., En Banc].·
> ((
>
> Decision 24 G.R. No. 277177
> of making exaggerated or frivolous promises that are patently unrealistic or
> irrelevant to the national office they seek to be elected.
> Finding the COMELEC Law Department's October 14, 2024 motu
> proprio Petition meritorious, the COMELEC Second Division, later affirmed
> by the COMELEC En Banc, declared Mustapha and his fe_llow respondents
> therein as nuisance candidates, and held that they have no serious intention to
> mount a nationwide campaign, and that they filed their CoCs merely to gain
> attention, promote a general advocacy, or to simply be noticed in the political
> sphere. The COMELEC arrived at this conclusion based on the following
> findings: (1) the respondents made exaggerated or frivolous promises during
> the filing of their CoCs that indicated their lack of suitability for the. positions
> they seek; (2) they failed to articulate any defmed agenda or clear policy
> position, showing that they lack the intention to fulfill the responsibilities of
> the office being sought; and (3) they received a low turnout of votes during
> the 2022 NLE, reflecting their inability to gamer meaningful support from the
> electorate, which is indicative of a lack of sincerity in their candidacy. In its
> Comment before the Court, the COMELEC added that the most obvious
> badge of Mustapha' s lack of bona fide intention to run for public office and
> his mockery of the election process is his supposed patent lack of caution in
> making false representations in his curriculum vitae submitted to the
> COMELEC.
> We disagree. •
> The assailed COMELEC Resolutions
> finding that Mustapha is. a nuisance
> candidate are void insofar as
> Mustapha is concerned because they
> were issued in violation of the due
> process requirements in quasi
> judicial proceedings, and are
> contrary to existingjurisprudence
> To reiterate, in a Section 69 proceeding, the burden is upon the
> COMELEC, as the petitioner, to prove by substantial evidence that the
> candidacy falls within any of the three grounds provided in said provision of
> the OEC. On the. other hand, the COMELEC, acting as a tribunal, is in turn
> obliged to ensure that its decision declaring a candidate as nuisance is: (1)
> arrived at after affording the parties real opportunities to be heard; (2)
> rendered after considering the evidence submitted by the parties; and (3)
> supported by substantial evidence. If the COMELEC's decision declaring a
>
> Decision 25 G.R. No. 277177
> candidate as a nuisance candidate fails to comply with any of these, then such
> decision is void insofar as the candidate challenging the same is concerned.
> Our own review of the records convinces Us that there is no sufficient
> evidence showing that Mustapha lacks bona fide intent to run for senator.
> Moreover, the acts or circumstances mentioned by the COMELEC in its
> assailed Resolutions that are purportedly demonstrative ofMustapha' slack of
> bona fide intent to run for senator are not only too general, but also immaterial
> to a determination of a candidate's bona fide intention to run for public office.
> To recall, the COMELEC, in its assailed Resolutions, cited three
> circumstances to support its findings that the respondents before it, including
> Mustapha, have no serious intention to mount a nationwide campaign, and
> that they filed their CoCs merely to "gain attention, promote a general
> advocacy, or to simply be noticed in the political sphere," 120 namely:. (1)
> .
> respondents' supposed behavior during the filing of their CoC reflects a lack
> of serious intent, capability, or suitability for public office; (2) respondents'
> supposed failure to articulate a defined agenda or clear policy positions; and
> (3) respondents' obtaining minimal votes during the 2022 NLE.
> In addition to the three circumstances stated in its assailed Resolutions,
> the CO:MELEC, in its Comment before this Court, argued that the most
> obvious badge ofMustapha'slack of bona fide intention to run for office and
> his mockery of the election process .is his supposed patent lack of caution in
> making false representations in his curriculum vitae submitted to the
> COMELEC.
> With respect to the first circumstance, the COMELEC pointed out that
> the respondents' behavior during the filing of their respective CoCs which
> pertained to their acts of making exaggerated or frivolous promises that are
> patently unrealistic or irrelevant to the office they seek to be elected.
> According to the COMELEC, these actions imply a lack of genuine intent to
> serve the public interest.
> The COMELEC, however, did not mention or state what these
> supposed exaggerated or frivolous promises were, nor did it point to the
> portion of the records where these supposed promises could be found.
> Certainly, this is violative oft he due process requirement that the COMELEC
> must state in its .decision the particular facts on which said decision is based.
> Without complying with such requirement, Mustapha would be unable to
> know which of his supposed statements were found to be ridiculous.
> 120 Rollo, p. 68.
>
> Decision 26 G.R. No. 277177
> Consequently, he would be unable to refute the allegations head on. Likewise,
> the Court in this instant petition is left without basis to determine if
> Mustapha's promises were indeed ridiculous and thus, warranting a further
> assessment on whether Mustapha really has a bona fide intent to run for public
> office.
> On the contrary, a review of the records reveals that Mustapha was not
> even present during the filing of his CoC because the same was filed through
> an authorized representative, as he was suffering from high blood pressure at
> that time. Therefore, Mustapha could not have made any such promise or
> statement, much less a ridiculous one, .at the time of the filing of his CoC.
> As regards the second circumstance, the COJ\1ELEC found that
> Mustapha failed to articulate a defined political agenda or clear policy
> positions. This finding, however, is inconsistent with the records.
> In. his Answer before the COJ\1ELEC, Mustapha categorically denied
> the general avermentof the COJ\1ELEC's Law Department that he has no
> platform of government or clear policy positions. He attached his personal
> platforms and advocacies, 121 and stated that his platforms are focus on the
> uplifting of the marginalized sectors, promoting peace and development in
> Mindanao, and addressing corruption in the government. 122 Mustapha
> likewise mentioned that he has been and still actively involved in promoting·
> the rights of laborers and in the advancement of social justice. Finally,
> Mustapha is a member and candidate of the WPP and necessarily, he
> subscribes to its platforms and policies, namely: the nationalization of the
> wage-setting system, termination of contractualization, regularization oflong
> term workers, and in general, the empowerment of workers through
> unionization and collective bargaining.123
> The above notwithstanding, the COJ\1ELEC still found that Mustapha
> failed to articulate a defined political agenda or clear policy position. Such
> finding is violative of the due process requirement that quasi-judicial agencies
> must consider the evidence submitted by the parties. Clearly, the COJ\1ELEC
> failed to consider Mustapha' s evidence for if it did, then it would have found
> that he has in fact articulated his platforms of government and his policy
> positions.
> At the very least, ifMustapha's platforms of government, as stated in
> his Answer, did not meet the standards of what the COJ\1ELEC considers as
> 121 Id. at 46--47.
> 122 Id. at 40.
> 123 Id. at 39--40.
>
> Decision 27 G.R. No. 277177
> a defined agenda or clear policy positions, then the COMELEC could have
> addressed and explained the same in its assailed Resolutions. Unfortunately,
> the COMELEC did not do so.
> In any event, as the COMELEC Law Department admitted in its motu
> proprio Petition, the law does not require a candidate to submit or present his
> or her program of government at the time he or she files his or her CoC.
> Section 74 of the OEC provides that the statement of a program of government
> is merely discretionary, and not a requirement when a person files his CoC,
> . viz.:
> Section 74 . Contents ofc ertificate ofc andidacy. - ....
> The person filing a certificate of candidacy shall also affix his latest
> photograph, passport size; a statement in duplicate containing his bio-data
> and program of government not exceeding one hundred words, if he so
> desires. (Emphasis supplied) •
> The discretionary nature of presenting one's program of government at
> the time of filing of his or her CoC, as well as the rationale therefor, is also
> clear from the legislative deliberations, to wit:
> MR. GARCIA (R.) .... I move for the deletion from the word "and
> program of government not exceeding one hundred words, and attach proof
> of payment of the filing fee prescribed by the Commission".
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). What does the sponsor
> say?
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). Well, may I just inform the Gentleman from
> South Cotabato that this program of government is really intended to
> unmask those who wish to run but do not really have their own platform no,
> I mean, this will really expose to the public the kind of candidates who
> would impose themselves upon the public . .So I think it ·i s best that we
> should tell .the voters the kind of candidates that offer their services no.
> MR. GARCIA (R.). But, Mr. Speaker ...
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). But as far as we, Members of the parties are
> concerned, we have our own platform of government. So actually, what we
> just put there is what our party stands for. But for those especially who wish
> to run just for the sake of running, I think this is one way of exposing their
> at least capability to the public even if they cannot express themselves in
> one hundred words and really that is the best way to discourage people from
>
> Decision 28 G.R. No. 277177
> accepting their offer to be their officials, whether in the local, national or in
> Batasan.
> MR. GARCIA (R.). Would this mean, Mr. Speaker, that this refers
> primarily to those independent candidates or .t o those alleged nuisance
> candidates considering that political parties where they have official
> candidates of their own political programs ...
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is really one way of
> telling the people: "these are the candidates, judge them initially on what
> they believe is their own platforms", so in that way they would have
> knowledge of who are these people running and offering their services.
> MR. GARCIA (R.). Well, I agree, Mr. Speaker. In view of that, Mr.
> Speaker, I withdraw for that particular motion, then I moved that instead
> "and program of government exceeding one hundred words, then the
> comma should be changed to period and attach proof of payment of filing
> fee prescribed by the Commission" should be removed, considering that Sec.
> 70, the following page, where there is a fee requirement is being sought to
> be abolished, Mr. Speaker.
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). We will agree to the last part of the
> amendment.
> M.R. GARCIA (R.). Yes, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). The sponsor has accepted
> the amendment. Is there any objection?
> MR. ATIENZA. Mr. Speaker.
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). The Gentleman from
> Manila.
> MR. ATIENZA. Before we rule on the amendment, may I just be
> allowed to clarify a point that the honorable sponsor mentioned about line
> 26.
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). Yes, about the program of government.
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). The sponsor may yield if
> he so desires.
> MR. ATIENZA. Did I hear you right, Mr. Speaker, when you said
> that this is meant for the independent candidates?
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). No, what I.am saying is that this is one way
> of exposing to the public the kind of candidates who would wish to offer
> their services to the voting public. But in the case of candidates with their
> t
>
> Decision 29 G.R. No. 277177
> own platform, meaning these registered political parties, they should not
> have a hard time because each one of us belonging to different parties have
> our own platform of government. But so, it was the statement of the
> Gentleman from South Cotabato that this is really meant towards the
> independent and nuisance candidates, no.
> MR. ATIENZA. So, anybody who runs for public office will.have
> to explain his program of government, is that the right interpretation?
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). Yes, yes, not exceeding one hundred words.
> MR. ATIENZA. Isn'tthatredundant, Mr. Speaker, anybody seeking
> office is understood to have an intention of form or plans for government
> asking him to write down his program.
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). Well, the Committee Chairman has also
> pointed out that under Section 86, page 48, we have a COMELEC
> information bulletin. So, this is in amplification of what I have said earlier,
> Mr. Speaker, that this is one way of informing the public, the voting public,
> who these candidates are offering their services. If, for example, a nuisance
> candidate files his. certificate and offers his program of government which
> is not even ... does .not even have sense in it because ... I mean, .after 100
> words cannot even ably express himself as to what program of government
> he has, then at least the people are now informed who these candidates are.
> So, anyway we are helping the voting public choose the kind of officers
> who will run our government through these means.
> MR. ATIENZA. Would inability or would a candidate's inability to
> provide this particular requirement disqualify him from running or ... in the
> election?
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). Well, I think there is a provision here which
> says that it must be complied with. And I don't know if it is disqualification.
> MR. GARCIA (M.M.). After discussing it with our resource persons,
> I was informed that it is not a ground for disqualification but more towards
> informing the public not only through the written explanation but also
> through the COMELEC information bulletin the ... what is .the kind of
> candidates that are offering themselves for service tci the voting public.
> MR. ATIENZA. That is the most important point, Mr. Speaker,
> that I wanted brought out because I did not want to disqualify people or
> persons who would run for public office who may not be able to write in
> beautiful words like a student would or a good student of English would
> from having his ideas that are in his heart and in his mind from
> performing his duties or even an elective official. Thank you.
> MR. GONZALES. Mr. Speaker.
>
> Decision 30 G.R. No. 277177
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). The Gentleman from San
> Juan and Mandaluyong.
> MR. GONZALES: In order to put into statute the results of this
> debate, may I propose on line 17 the following amendments then ... I
> mean, after ...
> MR. GONZALES. . ;. page 38 that after "words," and before
> "and", then include thedause IF HE SO DESIRES.
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). What does the
> proponent of the motion say? Gentleman from South Cotabato.
> MR. GONZALES. In short, it is uot mandatory upon him. It
> is . . . It might . . . He may do it if he feels that it may enhance his
> certificate of candidacy, his candidacy.
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). Will the Gentleman
> from San Juan and Mandaluyong please restate his amendment so that
> the Gentleman from South Cotabato could react on the same?
> MR. GONZALES. On line 27, page 38, after comma (,)
> following the word ... of the word "words" and before "and" insert the
> following phrase: IF HE SO DESIRES COMMA(,)[.]
> MR. BATERINA. Mr. Speaker.
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). Period (.)The Gentleman
> from Ilocos Sur.
> MR. BATERINA. May I ask some qµestions on the proponent?
> THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Asok). The proponent may yield
> ifhe so desires.
> MR. GONZALES. Gladly, Your Honor.
> MR. BATERINA. The word or the phrase "IF HE SO DESIRES",
> Mr. Speaker, would also modify "bio-data and program," not only "program
> of government" but also his "bio-data"?
> MR. GONZALES. The intention, as I have said, is to put into statute
> the ... the interpellation ... I mean, the results of the interpellation of the
> distinguished sponsor by the distinguished Member of Parliament from
> Manila and it is limited to the program of government ... "program of
> government not exceeding one hundred words", but as grammatically,
> J
>
> Decision 31 G.R. No. 277177.
> grammatically, it would refer now to both his biodata and a statem!)nt of
> program of government.
> MR. BAT ERINA. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 124
> As can be gleaned from the aforequoted exchanges, the legislators
> deliberately made the submission of a program of government optional so as
> not to give the impression that a candidate's failure to submit or articulate his
> or her program of government can result to his or her disqualification. As such,
> any alleged failure to submit or articulate a program of government at the time
> of the filing of a CoC cannot be used as an indicator of a candidate's supposed
> lack of bona fide intent to run for public office. While a candidate's
> compliance with such discretionary requirement may, as envisioned by the
> legislators, indeed enhance his or her candidacy, the candidate's
> noncompliance therewith, being a discretionary requirement, does not and
> should not cast doubt to the candidate's seriousness to run for public office.
> With respect to the third circumstance, the COMELEC found that
> Mustapha's minimal share of votes in the 2022 NLE for the position of
> Member, House of Representatives in the province of Lanao del Sur is
> indicativ.e of his lack of sincerity in his candidacy. It further found that
> Mustapha, in running for senator, failed to demonstrate a bona fide intentto
> campaign or actively participate in the electoral process.
> Although Mustapha admittedly received only 2% of the votes cast for
> the position of congressman in the province ofLanao del Sur during the2022
> NLE, this does not necessarily prove his lack of seriousness. to run for the
> position of senator in the upcoming 2025 NLE. There is simply no logical
> connection between Mustapha's alleged minimal votes during the previous
> elections and his seriousness to run for public office in the current electio.ns.
> Notably, the COMELEC correctly stated that "[t]he mere fact that an
> individual has previously run for public office does not automatically exempt
> them (sic) from being classified as nuisance candidates (sic) [in the present
> elections]."125 Inversely, the mere fact that a candidate has been previously
> declared a nuisance candidate in a prior election does not automatically mean
> that he or .she is likewise a nuisance candidate in the present elections. If a .
> candidate cannot be automatically declared a nuisance candidate now despite
> his or her being declared a nuisance candidate in a previous election, with
> more reason should such candidate be not declared a nuisance candidate now
> 124 IV Record, House 99th Congress, 2nd Session, 2025-2033 (February 20, 1985).
> 125 Rollo, p. 69.
>
> Decision 32 G.R. No. 277177
> simply because he or she obtained a minimal share of votes in a previous
> election.
> Besides, there is not always a direct relation between one's seriousness
> to run for office and the votes that a candidate will eventually obtain in the
> position aspired for. A candidate may be very serious in running for office and
> employs all possible legal means to obtain enough votes to win, but despite
> his or her seriousness and efforts, he or she may still lose. Conversely, a
> candidate may not have bona fide intent to run for public office but because
> of sheer popularity, political machinery, or for a plethora of possible reasons,
> he or she manages to win an election. This latter scenario has in fact been
> contemplated by the legislators when they were trying to grasp the meaning
> of nuisance candidacy, thus:
> MR. GONZALES. In connection with this, just to clarify it in order
> that we may know the legislative intention. If a candidate openly states in
> his campaign that he is not ... he will not assume·. office, but he is running
> in order to preserve his political leadership, let us say, in the province or in
> the municipality to enable the ... to enable his running mate to assume office
> or to get elected but he will not assume office, will he be a guest candidate
> since that is a circumstance or act which shows that he has no bona fide
> intention to run for that office?
> MR. PEREZ (L.). He will be considered a nuisance candidate ifhe
> does not have a bona fide intention to assume the position ife lected.
> MR. GONZALES. I recall that [this] had happened a number of
> times before where, in spite of that, they still get elected. Shall we overturn
> the will of the people? [T]here is a disclosure to the people and yet the
> people still elects (sic) him.
> MR. PEREZ (L.). If he is disqualified before the election because
> that .... those are facts that he has no bona fide intention to assume the.office
> if elected, he becomes a nuisance candidate.
> MR. VILLAFUERTE. Mr. Speaker. Just one comment, Mr. Speaker.
> The bona fide requirements so as 11ot to become a nuisance candidate does
> not pertain to the assumption but to the running for public office.
> MR. PEREZ (L.) But, Mr. Speaker, the very [!is] mota or the.very
> sole and purpose of running is to be in office, but if you are just running in
> order to create a vacancy for your running mate, you should not be
> considered a bona fide candidate.
>
> Decision 33 G.R. No. 277177
> MR. VILLAFUERETE. Well, then if that is your interpretation,
> Your Honor, that will not be consistent with the language of Section 64. Let
> me read it:
> The Commission may [motu proprio] or upon a verified
> petition of an interested party, refuse to give due course to or cancel
> a certificate of candidacy if it is shown that the certificate has been
> filed to put the election process in mockery or in disrepute or to
> cause confusion among the voters by the similarity of the names of
> the registered candidates by other circumstances or acts which
> demonstrate that the candidate has no bona fide intention to run for
> the office for which the certificate of candidacy has been filed and
> thus a (sic) prevent a faithful determination of the true will of the
> people.
> I •s hould think, Mr. Speaker, that once the people has decided
> because the attack on a nuisance candidate pertains to his disqualification
> through the filing, the certificate of candidacy filed but once the election
> has been held and the will of the people has been decided, I don't think that
> he can be considered a nuisance candidate simply because he did not assume
> his office.
> MR. PEREZ (L.). Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that the
> declaration of a nuisance candidacy is made before the election.
> MR. VILLAFUERTE. Yes.
> MR. PEREZ (L.). And if there is no determination of his nuisance
> candidacy and he is allowed to run and he wins, then the candidacy is over.
> There is no more occasion to declare him as a nuisance candidate.
> MR. VILLAFUERTE. Yes, I agree with your statement, Your
> Honor, because that means, therefore, that unless prevented through the
> cancellation of the certificate of candidacy ...
> MR, PEREZ (L.). Before the election.
> MR. VILLAFUERTE .... And he gets elected, the mere fact that he
> did not assume would not make him retroactively a nuisance candidate.
> MR. PEREZ (L.). No, no, Mr. Speaker. The declaration of his
> nuisance candidacy must [be] before the election.
> MR. VILLAFUERTE. Yes; thank you.
> MR. [PEREZ] (L.). If they don't declare him a nuisance candidate,
> then he is voted upon and he wins, I think that you cannot be declaring him
> a nuisance candidate anymore because his candidacy is over. He has been
> elected and may be proclaimed. •
>
> Decision 34 G.R. No. 277177
> MR. VILLAFUERTE. That would be a very good interpretation,
> your Honor.126
> To reiterate, the aforequoted exchanges confirm that there is no logical
> connection between a candidate's seriousness to run for public office and the
> number of votes cast in his or her favor during the election itself, more so, his
> or her garnered votes during the previous elections. This is because, as shown
> above, there are instances where a candidate who has no bona fide intention
> to run for office can win an election. Conversely, there are instances when a
> serious candidate obtains dismal votes during the election.
> If the COMELEC is allowed to declare one as a nuisance candidate
> simply because he or she obtained minimal votes in previous elections, and/or
> simply because such candidate could not possibly obtain sufficient number of
> votes during the present election, then the COMELEC will be virtually
> exercising that which is exclusively reserved to the voters on election day. In
> a democratic institution such as ours, it is the people who are vested with the
> sole authority to decide whether a candidate wins or not, and such decision is
> to be passed upon only during the day of election. The COMELEC, therefore,
> • should not deprive the people of a legitimate choice by declaring candidates
> as nuisance candidates simply because it perceives. that said candidates have
> low chances of winning as purportedly shown by their previous dismal votes.
> As to the finding thatMustapha failed to demonstrate abona fide intent
> to campaign or .actively participate in the electoral process, suffice it to state
> that this remains unsubstantiated. The COMELEC failed to allege, much less
> prove, the circumstances, actions, or events that would support its conclusion.
> Lastly, anent the fourth circumstance, the COMELEC claims that the
> most obvious badge ofMustapha's lack of bona fide intent to run for public
> office and his mockery of the election process is his supposed patent lack of
> caution in making false representations in his curriculum vitae submitted to
> the COMELEC. In support thereof, COMELEC attached the. certifications
> issued by the Ombudsman, PMA, and the DF A, purportedly attesting that
> Mustapha was never employed in their respective offices.
> Notably, these certifications were presented for the first time during the
> proceedings before this Court. Of course, the Court cannot now consider the
> truthfulness and veracity of these newly submitted evidence because they
> were not submitted together with the motu proprio Petition filed by the
> 126 IV Record, House 99th Congress, 2nd Session, 1869-1872 (February 20, 1985).
>
> Decision 35 G.R. No. 277177
> COMELEC Law Department, and thus, not previously considered by the
> COMELEC when it rendered its assailed Resolutions.
> While Mustapha has no obligation t6 prove his defense considering the
> COMELEC Law Department's failure to establish its allegations in the
> proceedings below, Mustapha has, nonetheless, presented evidence and
> tenable legal arguments that clearly show his bona fide intent to run for
> senator. Mustapha's bona fide intent to seek and assume public office is
> apparent from the following circumstances:
> First, Mustapha is an official candidate of the WPP. Notably, the WPP
> is a recognized and accredited national political party with various platforms
> and policies in the areas of labor and other social justice causes. In Uy, the
> Court ruled that membership in a political party weighs heavily against a
> finding of a nuisance candidacy, viz.:
> Foremost, Frederico's membership in NUP is not trivial and weighs
> heavily against a finding of nuisance candidacy·. The law defines a political
> party as "an organized group of persons pursuing the same ideology,
> politicalideas or platforms ofg overnment." Here, NUP's registration as a
> political party means it has met all the criteria under the law. The Comelec
> even verified NUP's government programs and extent of constituency.
> Corollarily, the nomination of Frederico and his acceptance as NUP's
> official candidate meant that he embodies the party's ideals and principles
> which he is obliged .to carry out and represent to the electorates. Indeed,
> Frederico enjoyed NUP's full logistical, financial, and organizational
> support in his candidacy .127 (Emphasis in the original, citations omitted)
> As a matter of fact, the WPP even filed a Motion to Intervene, 128
> arguing that Mustapha is not a nuisance candidate and that Mustapha has the
> backing of the WPP. This is another indication thatMustapha's candidacy is
> legitimate for he enjoys the full logistical, financial, and organizational
> support of the WPP.
> Second, and as already previously discussed, Mustapha submitted his
> programs of government, and was able to clearly articulate and present his
> individual platforms such. as the uplifting of the marginalized sectors,
> promoting peace and development in Mindanao, and addressing corruption in
> the government. 129 Mustapha likewise mentioned in his pleadings before the
> 127 Uy v. Commission on Elections, 945 Phil. 446,475 (2023) [Per J. Lopez, M., En Banc].
> 128 Rollo, pp. 59-63.
> 129 id. at 40.
>
> Decision 36 G.R. No. 277177
> COMELEC that he has been and is still involved in promoting the rights of
> laborers and in the advancement of social justice. 130
> Third, Mustapha consistently asserted that he is a Sultan in Marawi, a
> position that commands the respect and recognition of his constituents in said
> locality. Moreover, Mustapha holds a law degree from Manuel L. Quezon
> S.chool of Law, and a specialization in Shari'ah Law. He also averred that he
> obtained units in the University of the Philippines' masteral program .for
> Islamic studies.131 Finally, he claimed to have served the public and private
> sectors in various capacities. These assertions ofMustapha were not rebutted
> by the COMELEC. Mustapha was thus able to show that he has the capability
> to discharge the functions of a senator should he win in the upcoming elections.
> Finally, Mustapha exercised utmost vigilance in the protection of his
> candidacy. From the filing of the petition to declare him as a nuisance
> candidate, until the same reached this Court, Mustapha actively participated
> in the proceedings and filed responsive pleadings to contradict the
> COMELEC Law Department's allegations and assail the COMELEC's
> findings and conclusions. In Marquez 2022, the Court ruled that it is contrary
> to human experience for a candidate to go through the rigorous process of
> defending his or her candidacy up to the Supreme Court if such candidate
> lacks seriousness in his or hercandidacy.132
> Taken together, the foregoing circumstances, which are all supported
> by the records, show that Mustapha is serious in running for the position of
> senator. Thus, in declaring Mustapha a nuisance candidate, the COMELEC
> committed grave abuse of •d iscretion amounting to lack or excess of
> jurisdiction.
> Conclusion
> The effective implementation of the right to candidacy ensures that
> persons entitled to vote have a free choice of candidates.133 Thus, persons who
> are eligible to stand for election should not be unceremoniously excluded
> using unreasonable or discriminatory requirements. 134
> While the Court lauds the COMELEC's zeal in weeding out nuisance
> candidates from the ballot, the poll body is reminded that it should exercise
> 130 Id. at 39.
> 131 Id. at 49.
> 132 Marquez v. Commission on Elections, 924 Phil. 179, 194 (2022) [Per J. Lazaro-Javier, En Banc].
> 133 Covenant on Civil and Political Rights General Comment No. 25, p. 15.
> td:
> 134
>
> Decision 37 G.R. No. 277177
> its discretion with utmost scrutiny so as not to disqualify an otherwise
> legitimate candidate. Caution should be taken so that grounds, which the
> Court has already ruled to be invalid grounds for declaring one as a nuisance
> candidate, are not used or recycled against prospective candidates, particularly,
> the ground that one has no financial capacity to mount a national campaign,
> or the ground that one is perceived to be unpopular or has a tiny chance of
> winning the-election.
> We hope that the CO:MELEC, in the execution of its mandate, will be
> able to adopt or propose measures for such candidate to instead evolve from
> and overcome his or her perceived incapabilities and disadvantages. The
> promotion of a robust right to candidacy will not only give all candidates the
> real opportunity to prove their promise, but more importantly, ensure that the
> electorate has enhanced freedom and informed choice of their potential
> representatives.
> ACCORDINGLY, the instant Petition for Certiorari is GRANTED.
> The November 14, 2024 Omnibus Resolution of the Commission on Elections
> Second Division, and the November 29, 2024 Resolution of the Commission
> on Elections En Banc in SPA No. 24-098 (DC)(MP) and SPA No. 24-097
> (DC)(MP), respectively, are ANNULLED and SET ASIDE but only as to the
> cancellation of the Certificate of Candidacy of petitioner Subair Guinthum
> Mustapha.
> The Court's Temporary Restraining Order dated January 14, 2025 is
> made PERMANENT.
> SO ORDERED.
> ___ _
> ...
> __
> ~
> .GESMUNDO
>
> Decision 38 G.R. No. 277177
> WE CONCUR:
> •
> •
> Senior Associate Justice
> ~RNANDo
> AMIN s.·cAGUIOA
> Associate Justice
> Al\tlY '.A.RO-JAVIER HE
> ~.;~~
> SAMUEL11.GAER •
> Associate Justice
> (On Wellness Leave)
> RICARDO R. ROSARIO · JHOSE~PEZ
> Associate Justice Associate Justice
> '
> ~
> - .. t
> RB.DIM J~~MARQUEZ
> Associate Justice u::iate Justice
>
> Decision
> 39 G.R. No. 277177
> ~~.~ (On Leave)
> ANTONlO T. KHO, JR.-----_ MARIA FILOMENA D. SINGH
> Associate Justice Associate Justice
> ssociate Justice
> CERTIFICATION
> Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 13 of the Constitution, I certify that
> the conclusions in the above Decision had beenreached in consultation before
> the case was assigned to the writer of the opinion of the Court.
