# Republic Act No. 11497

**AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE LAS PIÑAS GENERAL HOSPITAL AND SATELLITE TRAUMA CENTER IN LAS PIÑAS CITY, METRO MANILA FROM TWO HUNDRED (200) TO FIVE HUNDRED (500) BEDS, UPGRADING ITS PROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND FACILITIES, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11497
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2020/ra_11497_2020.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand twenty.
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11497, November 13, 2020 ]**
>
> **AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF THE LAS PIÑAS GENERAL HOSPITAL AND SATELLITE TRAUMA CENTER IN LAS PIÑAS CITY, METRO MANILA FROM TWO HUNDRED (200) TO FIVE HUNDRED (500) BEDS, UPGRADING ITS PROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND FACILITIES, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** The authorized bed capacity of the Las Piñas General Hospital and Satellite Trauma Center (LPGHSTC) in Las Piñas City, Metro Manila is hereby increased from two hundred (200) to five hundred (500) beds.
>
> **Section 2.** The existing professional health care services and facilities of the LPGHSTC are also hereby upgraded to conform with and be commensurate to the increase in its bed capacity as provided in Section 1 hereof.
>
> **Section 3.** The existing workforce of the LPGHSTC, which includes doctors, nurses and support personnel, shall also be correspondingly increased.ℒαwρhi৷ The Secretary of the Department of Health (DOH) shall, in coordination with the Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the Commissioner of the Civil Service Commission (CSC), and after consultation with the Chief of the LPGHSTC, determine the additional new positions  to be created and filled up.
>
> **Section 4.** Any future increase in bed capacity, service capability and staffing requirements shall be consistent with the hospital development plan, which shall be prepared and submitted by the Medical Center Chief of the LPGHSTC to the DOH to reflect the developmental goals of the hospital.
>
> **Section 5.** The Secretary of Health shall immediately include in the Department's programs the implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 6.** The Secretary of Health, in coordination with the Secretary of the DBM and the Commissioner of the CSC shall, within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for its effective implementation.
>
> **Section 7.** If any provisions or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 8.** All other laws, decrees, executive orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 9.**  This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **ALAN PETER S. CAYETANO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which was originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on March 2, 2020, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on July 28, 2020, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on August 26, 2020.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **JOSE LUIS G. MONTALES** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: NOV 13 2020
>
> (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
