# Republic Act No. 11456

**An Act Creating an Additional Branch of Regional Trial Court in the 3rd District of Zamboanga del Norte, to be Stationed in the Municipality of Liloy, Amending for the Purpose Section 14, Paragraph (j) of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, Otherwise Known as "The Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980", as Amended, and Appropriating Funds Therefor**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11456
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2019/ra_11456_2019.html)

---

> **Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session**
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11456**
>
> **An Act Creating an Additional Branch of Regional Trial Court in the 3rd District of Zamboanga del Norte, to be Stationed in the Municipality of Liloy, Amending for the Purpose Section 14, Paragraph (j) of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, Otherwise Known as "The Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980", as Amended, and Appropriating Funds Therefor**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** One (1) Regional Trial Court branch to be stationed in the Municipality of Liloy, is hereby created in the Ninth Judicial Region.
>
> The Supreme Court shall, assign the branch number of the newly created Regional Trial Court branch in the Ninth Judicial Region.
>
> **Section 2.** The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, in coordination with the Secretary of Justice, shall immediately include in the Court’s program the implementation of this Act. The amount necessary for the creation and the continuous funding therefore shall likewise be included in the annual General Appropriations Act. The funds necessary shall be appropriated and released only upon the actual organization of the court and appointment of its personnel.
>
> **Section 3.** Section 14(j) of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, otherwise known as "The Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980", as amended, and all other laws, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby amended, repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> (Sgd) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> (Sgd) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as Senate Bill No. 1840 on May 27, 2019 and adopted by the House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill No. 8919 on June 3, 2019.
>
> (Sgd) **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> (Sgd) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> (Sgd) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Approved: August 30, 2019.
>
>
>
