# Republic Act No. 11146

**AN ACT DECLARING JU N E 18 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL NONWORKING HOLIDAY IN THE CITY OF BACOLOD, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE "BACOLOD CITY CHARTER DAY**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11146
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11146_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11146**
>
> AN ACT DECLARING JU N E 18 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL NONWORKING HOLIDAY IN THE CITY OF BACOLOD, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE "BACOLOD CITY CHARTER DAY", IN COMMEMORATION OF THE DAY PRESIDENT MANUEL L. QUEZON SIGNED AND APPROVED INTO EFFECT COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 326, CREATING THE CITY OF BACOLOD
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** June 18 of every year is hereby declared a special nonworking holiday in the City of Bacolod, Province of Negros Occidental, to be known as the "Bacolod City Charter Day", in commemoration of the day President Manuel L. Quezon signed and approved into effect Commonwealth Act No. 326, creating the City of Bacolod: *Provided,* That the inauguration of the City of Bacolod shall be commemorated every 19th of October: *Provided, further,* That the highlights of the Masskara Festival shall be held every 4th Sunday of October.
>
> **Section 2.** Republic Act No. 7724, entitled: "An Act Declaring October Nineteen Of Every Year A Special Nonworking Public Holiday In The City Of Bacolod To Be Known As ‘Bacolod City Charter Day’," and any law, presidential decree or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction, administrative order, rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.
>
> **Section 3.** - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> Approved,
>
> **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on February 14, 2018, amended by the Senate on September 10, 2018, and which amendment was concurred in by the House of Representatives on September 19, 2018.
>
> **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: November 9, 2018
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
