# Republic Act No. 11010

**An Act Amending Republic Act No. 10600, Entitled:**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11010
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11010_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand seventeen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11010**
>
> AN ACT AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10600, ENTITLED: "AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE SURIGAO DEL NORTE STATE UNIVERSITY IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE BY INTEGRATING THE SURIGAO STATE COLLEGE OF TECHNOLOGY IN SURIGAO CITY, THE SIARGAO NATIONAL COLLEGE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DEL CARMEN AND THE SURIGAO DEL NORTE COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAINIT, ALL LOCATED IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR"
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section 9 of Republic Act No. 10600 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 9. *The University President.* – The University shall be headed by a President, who shall render full-time service and who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the Board, upon recommendation of a duly constituted search committee. The University President shall have a term of four (4) years and shall be eligible for reappointment for another term: *Provided*, That in order to effect a smooth transition to a state university, the incumbent President of the SSCT shall serve as the first President of the University.
> >
> > "x x x."
>
> **Section 2.** Section 25 of the same Act is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 25. *Compliance With CHED Requirements.-*
> >
> > "x x x
> >
> > "The institution shall retain its status prior to the effectivity of this Act until it is able to comply with the requirements provided herein."
>
> **Section 3.** All laws, executive orders, decrees, instructions, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with any provision of this Act are hereby amended, repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> Approved,
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House
> of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on May 2, 2017, amended by the Senate on December 11, 2017, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on January 17, 2018.
>
> **LUTGARDO B. BARBO**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: March 27, 2018
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
