# Republic Act No. 11152

**AN ACT CONVERTING THE LAND TRANSPORTATION OFFICE - MEDELLIN EXTENSION OFFICE INTO A REGULAR DISTRICT OFFICE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11152
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11152_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11152**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE LAND TRANSPORTATION OFFICE - MEDELLIN EXTENSION OFFICE INTO A REGULAR DISTRICT OFFICE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The existing Land Transportation Office - Medellin Extension Office located in the Municipality of Medellin, Province of Cebu is hereby converted into a regular Land Transportation Office (LTO) District Office.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of the Department of Transportation shall issue rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of this Act.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Transportation shall immediately include in the Department’s programs the operationalization of a regular district office in the Municipality of Medellin, Province of Cebu, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s appropriations of the Land Transportation Office – Medellin Extension Office. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued operation of the LTO District Office shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 9, 2017 and October 1, 2018, respectively.
>
> **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: December 14, 2018
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
