# Republic Act No. 11160

**AN ACT GRANTING PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP TO FATHER JULIAN C. MAZANA**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11160
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11160_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11160**
>
> AN ACT GRANTING PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP TO FATHER JULIAN C. MAZANA
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Fr. Julian C. Mazana is hereby granted Philippine citizenship with all the rights, privileges and prerogatives, as well as the duties and obligations appurtenant thereto.
>
> **Section 2.** Fr. Julian C. Mazana shall take the Oath of Allegiance to the Republic of the Philippines before an officer duly authorized to administer the same.1avvphi1 The Oath of Allegiance shall be registered with the Bureau of Immigration.
>
> **Section 3.** Upon registration of the Oath of Allegiance, the Bureau of Immigration shall issue a Certificate of Naturalization to Fr. Julian C. Mazana who shall thereupon enter into the full enjoyment of Philippine citizenship.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (Sgd.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 15, 2018 and October 1, 2018, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (Sgd.) **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved: December 14, 2018
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
