# Republic Act No. 11254

**An Act Separating the Tinajeros National High School – Acacia Annex in Barangay Acacia, City of Malabon, Metro Manila From the Tinajeros National High School, Converting It Into an Independent National High School to Be Known As Acacia National High School and Appropriating Funds Therefor**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11254
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2019/ra_11254_2019.html)

---

> **Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session**
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11254**
>
> An Act Separating the Tinajeros National High School – Acacia Annex in Barangay Acacia, City of Malabon, Metro Manila From the Tinajeros National High School, Converting It Into an Independent National High School to Be Known As Acacia National High School and Appropriating Funds Therefor
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The Tinajeros National High School – Acacia Annex in Barangay Acacia, City of Malabon, Metro Manila is hereby separated from the Tinajeros National High School and converted into an independent national high school to be known as Acacia National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** All personnel, assets, liabilities and records of the Tinajeros National High School – Acacia Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Acacia National High School.
>
> **Section 3.** The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department’s program the operationalization of the Acacia National High School, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s appropriation of the Tinajeros National High School – Acacia Annex. Thereafter, the amount necessary for its continued, operation shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 4.** Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall formulate the rules and regulations implementing the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on December 10, 2018 and February 6, 2019, respectively.
>
> **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: March 29, 2019
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
