# Republic Act No. 11014

**An Act Declaring January 23 of every year a Special Working Holiday in the Entire Country to Commemorate the Declaration of the First Philippine Republic**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11014
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11014_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand seventeen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11014**
>
> AN ACT DECLARING JANUARY 23 OF EVERY YEAR A SPECIAL WORKING HOLIDAY IN THE ENTIRE COUNTRY TO COMMEMORATE THE DECLARATION OF THE FIRST PHILIPPINE REPUBLIC
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** This Act shall be known as "The First Philippine Republic Day Act".
>
> **Section 2.** January 23 of every year is hereby declared as "The First Philippine Republic Day", which shall be a special working holiday in the entire country to commemorate the declaration of the First Philippine Republic on January 23, 1899 held at the Barasoain Church in the City of Malolos, Province of Bulacan.
>
> **Section 3.** The National Historical Commission, in coordination with the Department of Education, shall plan and implement activities for "The First Philippine republic Day" and ensure that the significance of this historical event will continue to inspire and instill a sense of pride for the rich and noble history of the Filipino nation.
>
> **Section 4.** If any provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity and effectivity of the other provisions hereof.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 5.** All laws, decrees, orders, and issuances or portions thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House
> of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 19, 2016 and January 29, 2018, respectively.
>
> **LUTGARDO B. BARBO**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: April 5, 2018
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
