# Republic Act No. 11452

**An Act Converting the Land Transportation Office (LTO) Extension Office Located in the Municipality of Rosales, Province of Pangasinan into a Regular LTO District Office and Appropriating Funds Therefor**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11452
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2019/ra_11452_2019.html)

---

> **Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session**
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11452**
>
> **An Act Converting the Land Transportation Office (LTO) Extension Office Located in the Municipality of Rosales, Province of Pangasinan into a Regular LTO District Office and Appropriating Funds Therefor**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The existing Land Transportation Office (LTO) Extension Office located in the Municipality of Rosales, Province of Pangasinan, is hereby converted into a regular LTO district office to be known as the LTO-Rosales District Office.
>
> **Section 2.** The Secretary of Transportation shall immediately include in the Department’s program the operationalization of the LTO-Rosales District Office, the initial funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s appropriation of the LTO-Rosales Extension Office. Thereafter, such sums as may he necessary for the continued operation of the LTO-Rosales District Office shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> (Sgd) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> (Sgd) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on February 4, 2019 and June 3,2019, respectively.
>
> (Sgd) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> (Sgd) **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> (Sgd) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Approved: August 28, 2019.
>
>
>
