# Republic Act No. 11034

**An Act Naming the By-Pass Road Stretching From Barangay Bengcag, City of Laoag, to Barangay Buyon, Municipality of Bacarra, Province of Ilocos Norte, as the Rodolfo G. Farinas, Jr. By-Pass Road**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11034
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11034_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand seventeen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11034**
>
> An Act Naming the By-Pass Road Stretching From Barangay Bengcag, City of Laoag, to Barangay Buyon, Municipality of Bacarra, Province of Ilocos Norte, as the Rodolfo G. Farinas, Jr. By-Pass Road
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The by-pass road stretching from Barangay Bengcag, City of Laoag, To Barangay Buyon, Municipality of Bacarra, Province of Ilocos Norte, is hereby named as the Rodolfo G. Fariñas, Jr. By=Pass Road.
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) shall include in their annual budget the funds necessary for the implementation of this Act including installation and maintenance of signages thereat.
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> Approved,
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL III**
> President of the Senate
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 16, 2017 and March 12, 2018, respectively.
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> **LUTGARDO B. BARBO**
> Secretary of Senate
>
> Approved: June 15, 2018
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
