# Republic Act No. 11170

**An Act Amending Republic Act No. 9718, Entitled: An Act Converting the Naval Institute of Technology in the Municipality of Naval, Province of Biliran Into a State University to Be Known as the Naval State University, Integrating Therewith the Biliran National Agricultural College in the Municipality of Biliran and Appropriating Funds Therefor**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11170
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2019/ra_11170_2019.html)

---

> **Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session**
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11170**
>
> **An Act Amending Republic Act No. 9718, Entitled: An Act Converting the Naval Institute of Technology in the Municipality of Naval, Province of Biliran Into a State University to Be Known as the Naval State University, Integrating Therewith the Biliran National Agricultural College in the Municipality of Biliran and Appropriating Funds Therefor**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** - Section 1. Section 1 of Republic Act No. 9718 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec 1. *Renaming of the Naval State University.* - The Naval State University in the Municipality of Naval, Province of Biliran is hereby renamed as the Biliran Province State University (BiPSU), hereinafter referred to as the University integrating therewith the Biliran National Agricultural College in the Municipality of Biliran, both located in the Province of Biliran. The main campus of the University shall continue in its present location in the Municipality of Naval, Province of Biliran."
>
> **Section 2.** - Section 5 of Republic Act No. 9718 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > Sec. 5. *The Governing Board.* - The governing Board of the University shall be the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the Board, which shall be composed of the following:
> >
> > "(a) The Chairperson of the Commission on Higher Education (HED), Chairperson;
> >
> > "(b) The President of the University, Vice Chairperson;
> >
> > "(c) The Chairperson of the Committee on Education, Arts and Culture of the State, member;
> >
> > "(d) The Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical Education of the House of Representatives, member;
> >
> > "(e) The Regional Director of the National Economic and Development Authority ()NEDA), member;
> >
> > "(f) The Regional Director of the Department of Science and Technology (DOST), member;
> >
> > "(g) The Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture, member;
> >
> > "(h) The President of the federation of alumni asscoiations of the University, Member; and
> >
> > "(k) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who have distinguished themselves in their professions or fields of specialization of the University, members.
> >
> > "The Board shall appoint the two (2) prominent citizens from among a list of at least five (5) qualified persons in the Province of Biliran, whose nominations were submitted to the Board after publication for at least two (2) consecutive weeks, as recommended by the search committee constituted by the University President, in consultation with the Chairperson of the CHED and the other members of the Board, based on the normal standards and qualifications for the position set by he Board.
> >
> > "x x x."
>
> **Section 3.** - Section 9 of Republic Act No. 9718 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 9. *The University President.* - The University President shall be headed by a President, who shall render full-time service. The President, who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to the guidelines qualifications and/or standards set by the Board, upon recommendation of a duly constituted search committee: *Provided,* That in order to effect a smooth transition, the incumbent OIC President of the Naval State University shall serve as the first and full-fledge and duly appointed President of the University whose term is considered as a transition period for four (4) years.
> >
> > "x x x."
>
> **Section 4.** - Section 10 of Republic Act No. 9718 is hereby amended as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 10 *Heads of University Campuses.* - Campus Directors shall render full-time service.1âwphi1 They shall be appointed by the University President, subject to the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the Board: *Provided,* That the incumbent college administrators of the extension campuses shall serve as Campus Directors of their respective campuses."
>
> **Section 5.** *Implementing Rules and Regulations.* - The governing Board of the BiPSU, in consultation with the CHED, shall formulate the guidelines to fully implement the provisions of this Act within ninety (90) days from its effectivity.
>
> **Section 6.** *Effectivity.* - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 10, 2018.
>
> **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: January 3, 2019
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
