# Republic Act No. 11009

**An Act Converting the Talisay City College in the City of Talisay, Province of Cebu into the Talisay City State College, Amending for the Purpose Republic Act No. 10594, Entitled:**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11009
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11009_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand seventeen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11009**
>
> AN ACT CONVERTING THE TALISAY CITY COLLEGE IN THE CITY OF TALISAY, PROVINCE OF CEBU INTO THE TALISAY CITY STATE COLLEGE, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10594, ENTITLED: "AN ACT ESTABLISHING A STATE COLLEGE IN THE CITY OF TALISAY, PROVINCE OF CEBU TO BE KBOWN AS THE TALISAY CITY STATE COLLEGE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR"
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section 1 of Republic Act No. 10594 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 1. *Establishment.* – There is hereby established a state college by converting the Talisay City College into the Talisay City State College in the City of Talisay, Province of Cebu, hereinafter referred to as the College. Its main campus shall be in the City of Talisay, Province of Cebu."
>
> **Section 2.** Section 24 of Republic Act No. 10594 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 24. *Compliance with CHED Requirements.* –
> >
> > "x x x
> >
> > "The following are the operational requirements for a college:
> >
> > "(a) The appropriate or equivalent accreditation under CHED policies and guideline for colleges;
> >
> > "x x x
> >
> > "The institution shall retain its status prior to the effectivity of this Act until it is able to comply with the requirements provided herein."
>
> **Section 3.** All laws, executive orders, decrees, instructions, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with any provision of this Act are hereby amended, repealed or modified accordingly.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 4.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> Approved,
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House
> of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on May 2, 2017, amended by the Senate on December 11, 2017, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on January 17, 2018.
>
> **LUTGARDO B. BARBO**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: March 27, 2018
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
