# Republic Act No. 11382

**An Act Creating an Additional Branch of the Regional Trial Court in Ozamiz City, Converting the Municipal Circuit Trial Court Covering the Municipalities of Clarin and Tudela into the Municipal Trial Court of Clarin, and Creating a New Municipal Circuit Trial Court Covering the Municipalities of Sinacaban and Tudela, All in the Second Legislative District of the Province of Misamis Occidental, and Appropriating Funds Therefor, Amending for the Purpose Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, Otherwise Known as "The Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980"**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11382
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2019/ra_11382_2019.html)

---

> **Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session**
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11382**
>
> **An Act Creating an Additional Branch of the Regional Trial Court in Ozamiz City, Converting the Municipal Circuit Trial Court Covering the Municipalities of Clarin and Tudela into the Municipal Trial Court of Clarin, and Creating a New Municipal Circuit Trial Court Covering the Municipalities of Sinacaban and Tudela, All in the Second Legislative District of the Province of Misamis Occidental, and Appropriating Funds Therefor, Amending for the Purpose Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, Otherwise Known as "The Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980"**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be created an additional Regional Trial Court (RTC) branch in Ozamiz City, and a Municipal Circuit Trial Court (MCTC) comprising the municipalities of Sinacaban and Tudela, all in the Second Legislative District of the Province of Misamis Occidental.
>
> The existing Municipal Circuit Trial Court (MCTC) comprising the municipalities of Clarin and Tudela, both in the Second legislative District of the Province of Misamis Occidental, shall be converted into the Municipal Trial Court (MTC) of Clarin.
>
> The existing Fourth Municipal Circuit Trial Court (MCTC) comprising the municipalities of Jimenez and Sinacaban shall be reorganized, where the Municipality of Sinacaban shall no longer be circuitized with the Municipality of Jimenez, located in the First Legislative District of the Province of Misamis Occidental. The Municipality of Sinacaban together with the Municipality of Tudela shall now comprise the Fourth Municipal Circuit Trial Court, with seat at Sinacaban.
>
> **Section 2.** The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, in coordination with the Secretary of Justice, shall immediately include in its program the operationalization of the additional Regional Trial Court, the Municipal Trial Court, and the Municipal Circuit Trial Court in the Second Legislative District of the Province of Misamis Occidental. The funds necessary for the operation of the courts herein created shall be appropriated and released only upon the actual organization of the courts and the appointment of its personnel.
>
> **Section 3.** All pending cases within the jurisdiction of the municipalities of Sinacaban and Tudela shall be transferred to the newly created Fourth Municipal Circuit Trial Court and, with respect to the Municipality of Jimenez, to the Third Municipal Circuit Trial Court, and shall be tried and decided therein.
>
> **Section 4.** This Act amends Section 14(k) and Section 29 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, as amended.1âшphi1 All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations, other issuances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed and modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> (Sgd) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> (Sgd) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on February 20, 2018, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on May 27, 2019, and which amendment was concurred in by the House of Representatives on June 3, 2019.
>
> (Sgd) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> (Sgd) **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> (Sgd) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Approved: August 22, 2019.
>
>
>
