# Republic Act No. 11064

**AN ACT RENAMING PANGLAO ISLAND CIRCUMFERENTIAL ROAD TRAVERSING BARANGAYS TANGNAN, BIL-ISAN, LOOC, POBLACION, DANAO, TAW ALA, BOLOD AND LIBAONG IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF PANGLAO AND BARANGAYS TOTOLAN. SONGCULAN, TABALONG, BINGAG, DAO, SAN ISIDRO, IKING 1, BIKING 2, CATARMAN, MAYACABAC, POBLACION AND UNION IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DAUIS, AS ANOS FONACIER CIRCUMFERENTIAL ROAD (DAUIS-PANGLAO)**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11064
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11064_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand seventeen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11064**
>
> **AN ACT RENAMING PANGLAO ISLAND CIRCUMFERENTIAL ROAD TRAVERSING BARANGAYS TANGNAN, BIL-ISAN, LOOC, POBLACION, DANAO, TAW ALA, BOLOD AND LIBAONG IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF PANGLAO AND BARANGAYS TOTOLAN. SONGCULAN, TABALONG, BINGAG, DAO, SAN ISIDRO, IKING 1, BIKING 2, CATARMAN, MAYACABAC, POBLACION AND UNION IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DAUIS, AS ANOS FONACIER CIRCUMFERENTIAL ROAD (DAUIS-PANGLAO)**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** In recognition of the remarkable achievements and contributions of the late Anos Fonacier in the development of Bohol’s tourism, the Panglao Island Circumferential Road which traverses barangays Tangnan, Bil-isan, Looc, Poblacion, Danao, Tawala, Bolod and Libaong in the Municipality of Panglao and barangays Totolan, Songculan, Tabalong, Bingag, Dao, San Isidro, Biking 1, Biking 2, Catarman, Mayacabac, Poblacion and Union in the Municipality of Dauis, is hereby renamed as Anos Fonacier Circumferential Road (Dauis-Panglao).
>
> **Section 2.** The Department of Public Works and Highways is hereby directed to implement of the provision of this Act.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after the completion of its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in any newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House  of Representatives and the Senate on March 13, 2017 and March 12, 2018, respectively.
>
> **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: August 23, 2018
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
