# Republic Act No. 11488

**AN ACT TRANSFERRING THE LOCATION OF THE SORSOGON SECOND DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE FROM BULAN, SORSOGON TO GUBAT, SORSOGON, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9689, ENTITLED "AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE SORSOGON DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE IN THE PROVINCE OF SORSOGON AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR"**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11488
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2020/ra_11488_2020.html)

---

> Eighteenth Congress
> First Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second day of July, two thousand nineteen.
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11488, August 14, 2020 ]**
>
> **AN ACT TRANSFERRING THE LOCATION OF THE SORSOGON SECOND DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE FROM BULAN, SORSOGON TO GUBAT, SORSOGON, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9689, ENTITLED "AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE SORSOGON DISTRICT ENGINEERING OFFICE IN THE PROVINCE OF SORSOGON AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR"**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representative of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** Section 1 of Republic Act No. 9689 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "**Section 1.** There shall be established under the supervision of the Department of Public Works and Highways, a second district engineering office in the Second Congressional District of the Province of Sorsogon to be located in the Municipality of Gubat, to be known as the Sorsogon Second District Engineering Office."
>
> **Section 2.** All other laws, decrees, executive orders and other issuances that are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate | (SGD.) **ALAN PETER S. CAYETANO** Speaker of the House of Representatives |
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on January 27, 2020 and June 1, 2020, respectively.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate | (SGD.) **JOSE LUIS G. MONTALES** Secretary General House of Representatives |
>
> Approved. AUG 14 2020
>
> (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
