# Republic Act No. 11174

**An Act Separating the Sicsican National High School - Annex in Barangay Sta. Monica, Puerto Princesa City, Province of Palawan From the Sicsican National High School, Converting It Into An Independent National High School To Be Known As Santa Monica National High School, And Appropriating Funds Therefor**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11174
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2019/ra_11174_2019.html)

---

> **Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session**
>
> *Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.*
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11174**
>
> **An Act Separating the Sicsican National High School - Annex in Barangay Sta. Monica, Puerto Princesa City, Province of Palawan From the Sicsican National High School, Converting It Into An Independent National High School To Be Known As Santa Monica National High School, And Appropriating Funds Therefor**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress Assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** - The Sicsican National High School - Annex in Barangay Santa Monica, Puerto Princesa City, Province of Palawan is hereby separated from the Sicsican National High School to an independent national high school to be known as Santa Monica National High School.
>
> **Section 2.** - All personnel, assets, liabilities, and records of the Sicsican National High School - Annex are hereby transferred to and absorbed by the Santa Monica National High School.1âwphi1
>
> **Section 3.** - The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department's program the operationalization of the Santa Monica National High School, the initial charging of which shall be charged against the current year's appropriation of the Sicsican National High School - Annex. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation of the school shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** - The Secretary of Education shall formulate the rules and regulations necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act within ninety (90) days of its effectivity.
>
> **Section 5.** - This act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in any newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This act was originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on July 31, 2018 and October 10, 2018, respectively
>
> **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: January 3, 2019
>
> (Sgd.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
