# Republic Act No. 11394

**An Act Mandating Public and Private Educational Institutions to Provide Neutral Desks to Students**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11394
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2019/ra_11394_2019.html)

---

> **Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session**
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11394**
>
> **An Act Mandating Public and Private Educational Institutions to Provide Neutral Desks to Students**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippine Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** This Act shall be known as the "Mandatory Provision of Neutral Desks in Educational Institutions Act".
>
> **Section 2.** The State recognizes the vital role of the youth in nation-building and shall promote and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social well-being. It is hereby declared the policy of the State to promote the equal development of students, including those who are left-handed. Towards this end, the State shall require educational institutions to provide appropriate armchairs to address the needs of the left-handed student population.
>
> **Section 3.** It shall be obligatory for all educational institutions, both public and private, that make use of armchairs in the classroom to provide neutral desks to all students.
>
> Neutral desk shall mean a table or an armchair that is suitable for both right-handed and left-handed students.1âшphi1
>
> These institutions shall provide neutral desks equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the student population within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act. Henceforth, said institutions are mandated to provide neutral desks to all students.
>
> **Section 4.** Within sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Department of Education, the Commission on Higher Education, and the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority shall formulate the rules and regulations including the administrative penalties for noncompliance of the provisions of this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> (Sgd) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III**
> President of the Senate
>
> (Sgd) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO**
> Speaker of the House of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on December 10, 2018, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on May 27, 2019, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on June 3, 2019.
>
> (Sgd) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> (Sgd) **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING**
> Acting Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> (Sgd) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
> Approved: August 22, 2019.
>
>
>
