# Republic Act No. 11324

**AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF GOVERNOR CELESTINO GALLARES MEMORIAL HOSPITAL (GCGMH) IN TAGBILARAN CITY, PROVINCE OF BOHOL FROM TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-FIVE (225) TO FIVE HUNDRED TWENTY-FIVE (525) BEDS AND UPGRADING ITS SERVICES AND FACILITIES, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7266, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11324
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2019/ra_11324_2019.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Third Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11324, April 17, 2019 ]**
>
> **AN ACT INCREASING THE BED CAPACITY OF GOVERNOR CELESTINO GALLARES MEMORIAL HOSPITAL (GCGMH) IN TAGBILARAN CITY, PROVINCE OF BOHOL FROM TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-FIVE (225) TO FIVE HUNDRED TWENTY-FIVE (525) BEDS AND UPGRADING ITS SERVICES AND FACILITIES, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7266, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES**
>
> **Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:**
>
> **Section 1.** *Increase in Authorized Bed Capacity.* - The authorized bed capacity of Governor Celestino Gallares Memorial Hospital (GCGMH) is hereby increased from two hundred twenty-five (225) to five hundred twenty-five (525) beds, amending for the purpose Republic Act No. 7266. The increase in bed capacity shall be implemented consistent with the five (5) year development plan of the hospital.
>
> **Section 2.** *Upgrade of Existing Service Facilities and Professional Health Care Services.*- The existing service facilities and professional health care service of GCGMH are hereby upgraded to conform with and be commensurate to the increase in authorized bed capacity as provided in Section 1 hereof. The GCGMH shall submit to the Department of Health its proposed development and the additional clinical departments and special units it requires to meet the increased authorized bed capacity.ℒαwρhi৷
>
> **Section 3.** *Implementation and Appropriation.*- The Secretary of Health shall immediately include in the Department's program the implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** *Separability Clause.* - If any provision or part of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.
>
> **Section 5.** *Repealing Clause.* - All other laws, decrees, orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 6.** *Effectivity.*- This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette or in any newspaper of general circulation.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO** Speaker of the House of Representatives | (SGD.) **VICENTE C. SOTTO III** President of the Senate |
>
> This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as Senate Bill No. 1768 on February 4, 2019 and adopted by the House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill No. 8434 on February 8, 2019.
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (SGD.) **DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING** Acting Secretary General House of Representatives | (SGD.) **MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA** Secretary of the Senate |
>
> Approved: APR 17 2019
>
> |  |
> | --- |
> | (SGD.) **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE** President of the Philippines |
>
>
>
