# Republic Act No. 11013

**An Act Amending Republic Act No. 10585, Entitled:**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 11013
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra2018/ra_11013_2018.html)

---

> Seventeenth Congress
> Second Regular Session
>
> Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand seventeen.
>
> **REPUBLIC ACT No. 11013**
>
> AN ACT AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10585, ENTITLED: "AN ACT CONVERTING THE COTABATO CITY POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE INTO A STATE UNIVERSITY TO BE KNOWN AS THE COTABATO STATE UNIVERSITY AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR"
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congre*ss *assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Section 26 of Republic Act No. 10585 is hereby amended to read as follows:
>
> > "Sec. 26. *Compliance With CHED Requirements.* - The provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the establishment or conversion of the institution into a state university shall become effective only upon the determination and declaration by the CHED, based on the recommendation of a panel of experts, that the institution has complied with the requirements for a university status. The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly provide technical assistance to the institution and monitor compliance with the requirements of the Commission.
> >
> > "x x x
> >
> > "The institution shall retain its status prior to the effectivity of this Act until it is able to comply with the requirements provided herein."
>
> **Section 2.** This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the *Official Gazette* or in a newspaper of general circulation.1âwphi1
>
> Approved,
>
> **AQUILINO "KOKO" PIMENTEL III**
> President of the Senate
>
> **PANTALEON D. ALVAREZ**
> Speaker of the House
> of Representatives
>
> This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on May 2, 2017, amended by the Senate on December 11, 2017, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on January 17, 2018.
>
> **LUTGARDO B. BARBO**
> Secretary of the Senate
>
> **CESAR STRAIT PAREJA**
> Secretary General
> House of Representatives
>
> Approved: April 4, 2018
>
> **RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE**
> President of the Philippines
>
>
>
