# Republic Act No. 6769

**AN ACT CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JOSE IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6769
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1989/ra_6769_1989.html)

---

> **Eighth Congress**
>
>
>
> **Republic Act No. 6769             November 15, 1989**
>
> **AN ACT CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JOSE IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** Dinagat in the Province of Surigao del Norte shall remain a municipality, exercising powers and discharging functions over the areas specified in the law of its creation, except Barangays San Jose, Matingbe, Jacques, Aurelio, Mahayahay, San Juan, Don Ruben Ecleo, Justiniana Edera, Sta. Cruz, Cuarenta, Wilson and Luna, all of the aforesaid municipality, which are hereby segregated therefrom to constitute a separate and independent Municipality of San Jose, both in the Province of Surigao del Norte. It shall be bounded as follows:
>
> Beginning at point 1 (09º-59'-45.00"-125º-32'-30") thence due North, 2,654.78 meters to point 2; due East, 10,463 meters to point 3; due West, 2,654.78 meters to point 4; due West, 10,463.85 meters to point 1.
>
> **Section 2.** The seat of government of the Municipality of San Jose shall be in Barangay San Jose Proper.
>
> **Section 3.** After ratification by a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite to be conducted in the entire Municipality of Dinagat, Surigao del Norte, within sixty (60) days from approval of this Act, the President shall appoint the officials of the new municipality. Said officials shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected and qualified.
>
> **Section 4.** The Commission on Elections shall conduct and supervise the plebiscite. The expenses in holding the plebiscite shall be taken out of the Contingent Fund under the current fiscal year appropriations.
>
> **Section 5.** Thereafter, the proportionate share of the new Municipality of San Jose in the obligations, funds, assets, and other properties of the Municipality of Dinagat shall be transferred to the newly created municipality upon recommendation of the Commission on Audit.
>
> **Section 6.** All existing laws governing the operation of the municipalities are hereby made applicable to the Municipality of San Jose.
>
> **Section 7.** All laws, parts of laws, decrees as well as executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 8.** This Act shall take effect upon its publication in at least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.
>
> Approved: **November 15, 1989**
>
>
>
