# Republic Act No. 6890

**AN ACT CREATING A TEN-BED MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL WITH THE NECESSARY EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF HINOBA-AN, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE HINOBA-AN MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6890
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1990/ra_6890_1990.html)

---

> .
>
> **[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6890, March 08, 1990 ]**
>
> AN ACT CREATING A TEN-BED MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL WITH THE NECESSARY EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF HINOBA-AN, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, TO BE KNOWN AS THE HINOBA-AN MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR
>
> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:
>
> **Section 1.** There shall be established, under the direct supervision of the Department of Health, a ten-bed muninicipal hospital with the necessary equipment and supplies in the Municipality of Hinoba-an, Negros Occidental, to be known as the Hinoba-an Municipal Hospital, which shall be under free medical service and accommodation to indigent patients.
>
> **Section 2.** The municipal hospital shall be administered by the corresponding chiefs of hospital to be appointed by the Secretary of Health and shall receive compensation in accordance with the rates prescribed by the Secretary of Health.  With the approval of the Secretary of Health, the chiefs of hospital may allow subsistence quarters and laundry service, in kind, to physicians, nurses or employees of the said hospital, whenever such policy is deemed advisable in the interest of public service.1âшphi1
>
> **Section 3.** The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be charged against the appropriations authorized for the purpose under the Fiscal Year 1989 General Appropriations Act.  Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the herein hospital shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.
>
> **Section 4.** Before the construction of the hospital, the Secretary of Health shall issue a written assurance that personnel of the hospital will be appointed and that funds for its maintenance and operation have been appropriated.
>
> **Section 5.** This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
>
> Approved,
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | (Sgd.) **JOVITO R. SALONGA** *President of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **RAMON V. MITRA** *Speaker of the House of Representatives* |
> | This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 22, 1989. | |
> | (Sgd.) **EDWIN P. ACOBA** *Secretary of the Senate* | (Sgd.) **QUIRINO D. ABAD SANTOS, JR.** *Secretary of the House of Representatives* |
>
> Approved: March 8, 1990
>
> (Sgd.) **CORAZON C. AQUINO**
> *President of the Philippines*
>
>
>
