# Republic Act No. 6650

**AN ACT TO GRANT THE FRANKING PRIVILEGE TO THE MEMBERS OF CONGRESS**

## Metadata

- **RA Number**: 6650
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1988/ra_6650_1988.html)

---

> **Eighth Congress**
>
>
>
> **Republic Act No. 6650             March 14, 1988**
>
> **AN ACT TO GRANT THE FRANKING PRIVILEGE TO THE MEMBERS OF CONGRESS**
>
> *Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:*
>
> **Section 1.** The franking privilege is hereby granted to the Members of Congress: provided, that such privilege shall only be available to assist and expedite the conduct of the official businesses, activities and duties of the Congress, and shall not be utilized for matters which are purely personal or political partisan.
>
> **Section 2.** Upon the death of a Member of the Congress during his or her term of office, the surviving spouse is granted the same privilege, for a period of six (6) months after the demise of said Member: provided, that such privilege shall be limited to non-political correspondence relating to the death of the Member.
>
> **Section 3.** All official mail availing of this franking privileges must be sealed in an official envelope indicating therein the name of the Member of Congress, with the Official Seal of the Republic of the Philippines of Congress on the left hand corner and the printed penalty clause on the right hand corner.
>
> **Section 4.** The Secretary of Transportation and Communications shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Act.
>
> **Section 5.** Private or unauthorized use of the franking privilege shall be penalized by a fine of five hundred pesos (P500.00).
>
> **Section 6.** This act shall take effect immediately upon approval.
>
> Approved: **March 14, 1988.**
>
>
