# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 479

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 442, SERIES OF 1991, AS AMENDED, FOR THE PURPOSE OF STRENGTHENING AND STREAMLINING THE PRESIDENTIAL ACTION CENTER**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 479
- **Date**: August 27, 1991
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1991/eo_479_1991.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 479, August 27, 1991 ]
>
> AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 442, SERIES OF 1991, AS AMENDED, FOR THE PURPOSE OF STRENGTHENING AND STREAMLINING THE PRESIDENTIAL ACTION CENTER
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 442 dated 3 January 1991, as amended by Executive Order No. 447 dated 5 February 1991, creating the Presidential Action Center in the Office of the President, vested the same with broad powers and functions;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the office of the President strongly adheres to the principle of decentralization with corresponding responsibility and accountability;
>
> **WHEREAS,** to enable the Office of the President to be more responsive to the exigencies of the service, there is need to strengthen the coordinative and facilitate functions of the Presidential Action Center;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO**, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Section 2 of Executive Order No. 442 is hereby amended to read, as follows:
>
> > “Sec. 2. The Presidential Action Center shall perform the following functions:
> >
> > 1. Provide callers, visitors and other persons who come to transact business with the Office of the President with the necessary information;
> >
> > 2. Serve as the liaison unit of the Office of the President with various departments and agencies of the Government on all requests for assistance as well as complaints and grievances by the general public;
> >
> > 3. Coordinate with the various departments and agencies in order to carry out its objectives and functions, and institute a follow-up and feedback mechanism to ensure that the referrals of the Presidential Action Center are given attention and expeditiously acted upon;
> >
> > 4. To make available to the public counseling services pertaining to their requests, grievances or complaints; and
> >
> > 5. To perform other functions and responsibilities as the President or the Executive Secretary may direct.”
>
> **Section 2.** For greater effectivity and efficiency, all other programs and services of the Presidential Action Center which pertain to other government agencies and units shall be continued by the said agencies and units.
>
> **Section 3.** Section 3 of Executive Order No. 442 is hereby repealed.
>
> **Section 4.** All other provisions of Executive Order No. 442, as amended, shall remain in force and in effect. Those provisions in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this issuance are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.
>
> **Section 5.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of August in the year of our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-One.
>
> (Sgd.) **CORAZON C. AQUINO**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILON**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
