# EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 490

**TRANSFERRING THE COMMISSION ON FILIPINOS OVERSEAS FROM THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS.**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 490
- **Date**: November 26, 1991
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1991/eo_490_1991.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 490, November 26, 1991 ]
>
> TRANSFERRING THE COMMISSION ON FILIPINOS OVERSEAS FROM THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS.
>
> WHEREAS, the Commission on Filipinos Overseas was created under the Office of the President pursuant to Batas Pambansa Blg. 79, approved on June 16, 1980;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Commission on Filipinos Overseas was transferred from the Office of the President to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs pursuant to Executive Order No. 708, dated July 27, 1981;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Commission on Filipinos Overseas was retained directly under the supervision of the Office of the President pursuant to Executive Order No. 728, dated September 12, 1981;
>
> **WHEREAS,** it is necessary to transfer the Commission on Filipinos Overseas from the Office of the President to the Department of Foreign Affairs;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the President of the Philippines has continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President by, among others, transferring any agency from the Office of the President to any other Department or Agency of the Government pursuant to Book III, Title III, Chapter 10, Section 31, of the 1987 Administrative Code;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO**, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me under Book III, Title III, Chapter 31, of the 1987 Administrative Code, do hereby transfer the Commission on Filipinos Overseas from the Office of the President to the Department of Foreign Affairs.
>
> This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.
>
> (Sgd.) **CORAZON C. AQUINO**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **FRANKLIN M. DRILLON**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
