# Executive Order No. 119

**AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 106 LIFTING THE SUSPENSION OF THE APPLICATION OF THE TARIFF CONCESSIONS GRANTED BY THE PHILIPPINES ON REFRACTORY BRICKS UNDER THE ASEAN PREFERENTIAL TRADING ARRANGEMENTS**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 119
- **Date**: August 9, 1993
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo1993/eo_119_1993.html)

---

> **MALACAĂ‘AN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> [ Executive Order No. 119, August 9, 1993 ]
>
> AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 106 LIFTING THE SUSPENSION OF THE APPLICATION OF THE TARIFF CONCESSIONS GRANTED BY THE PHILIPPINES ON REFRACTORY BRICKS UNDER THE ASEAN PREFERENTIAL TRADING ARRANGEMENTS
>
> WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 106 was issued on 10 July 1993 lifting the suspension of the application of the tariff concessions on refractory bricks under the ASEAN Preferential Trading Arrangements (PTA);
>
> **WHEREAS,** Annex Â“AÂ” of said Executive Order needs to be amended to effect certain necessary technical modifications;
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS,** President of the Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me under Section 402 of the Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, do hereby order:
>
> **Section 1.** Annex Â“AÂ” of Executive Order No. 106 is hereby amended and a modified Annex Â“AÂ” is herein provided.
>
> **Section 2.** Upon effectivity of this Executive Order, the 10% binding concession on refractory bricks and the Margin of Preference on fireclay bricks, including alumina bricks, as specified in Columns 7, 8 and 9 of attached Annex Â“AÂ”, as amended, shall be restored. In effect, such articles shall be subject to the Preferential ASEAN Tariff in accordance with the schedule indicated in Columns 10 to 13 of said amended Annex Â“AÂ”.
>
> **Section 3.** In the event that any subsequent changes are made in the basic Philippine rate of duty on item nos. (3) and (5), such articles shall automatically be accorded the corresponding amended rate of duty. The rates of duty on item nos. (1), (2), (4) and (6) shall remain bound at 10% for ASEAN.
>
> **Section 4.** All laws, orders issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof, inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.1aÑˆphi1
>
> **Section 5.** This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.
>
> Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.
>
> (Sgd.) **FIDEL V. RAMOS**
> President of the Philippines
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
