# AC-11095

**EUFEMIA A. CAMINO vs. ATTY. RYAN REY L. PASAGUI**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: EUFEMIA A. CAMINO vs. ATTY. RYAN REY L. PASAGUI
- **Ponente**: Per Curiam
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Resolution
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2017/jan2017/ac_11095_2017.html)

---

> **EN BANC**
>
> January 31, 2017
>
> A.C. No. 11095
>
> EUFEMIA A. CAMINO, Complainant,
>
> vs.
> **ATTY. RYAN REY L. PASAGUI**, Respondent.
>
> **R E S O L U T I O N**
>
> ***PER CURIAM:***
>
> Before the Court is a Motion for Issuance of Writ of Execution1 filed by Complainant Eufemia A. Camino, relative to the Court's *Per Curiam* Decision dated September 20, 2016 in A.C. No. 11095.
>
> In a Disbarment Complaint dated July 13, 2011 filed by complainant against respondent Atty. Ryan Rey L. Pasagui *(Atty. Pasagui)* before the Integrated Bar of the Philippines-Commission on Bar Discipline *(IBP-CED),* docketed as CBD Case No. 11-3140, now A.C. No. 11095, complainant alleged, among other things, that respondent violated their agreement for the latter to facilitate and secure a loan in order to finance the payment of necessary expenses to transfer the title of a certain property under her name. She claimed that respondent obtained a loan in her name and that of her husband, using their property as collateral, but Atty. Pasagui arrogated the proceeds thereof to himself.
>
> In a *Per Curiam* Decision2 dated September 20, 2016, the Court, ruling in favor of the complainant, found that respondent was guilty of deceit, malpractice and gross misconduct for converting the money of his client to his own personal use without her consent. By his failure to make good of their agreement to use the proceeds of the loan for the transfer of the title in complainant's name, Atty. Pasagui not only betrayed the trust and confidence reposed upon him by his client, but he is likewise guilty of engaging in dishonest and deceitful conduct. For his acts, Atty. Pasagui degraded himself and besmirched the fair name of an honorable profession. Thus, the Court affirmed the findings and conclusions of the IBP Board of Governors, but modified the recommended penalty and instead imposed the penalty to Disbarment. The Court also ordered Atty. Pasagui to return the loan proceeds he received from Perpetual Help Credit Cooperative, Inc. *(PHCCI)* on behalf of the complainant, with interest, together with all the documents pertinent to the loan application and those he received from the complainant, to wit:
>
> **> WHEREFORE,**Resolution No. XXI-2014-938 dated December 14, 2014 of the IBP-Board of Governors which found respondent Atty. Ryan Rey L. Pasagui **GUILTY** of violation of Rule 1.01 of the Code of Professional Responsibility is **AFFIRMED with MODIFICATION as to the penalty.** Respondent Atty. Ryan Rey L. Pasagui is instead meted the penalty of **DISBARMENT.** Respondent is further **ORDERED** to immediately **RETURN** the loan proceeds amounting to ₱1,000,000.00 and to pay legal interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) *per annum* computed from the release of the loan on February 15, 2011 up to June 30, 2013, and six percent (6%) *per annum* from July 1, 2013 until fully paid, as well as, the ₱l20,000.00 received for the purpose of transferring the title in the name of the complainant and to pay legal interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) *per annum* computed from receipt of the amount on February 3, 2011 up to June 30, 2013, and six percent (6%) *per annum* from July 1, 2013 until fully paid. He is likewise **ORDERED** to **RETURN** all other documents pertinent to the loan obtained from PHCCI and those received from complainant.
>
> Let a copy of this Decision be furnished to the Office of the Bar Confidant, to be appended to the personal record of respondent; the Integrated Bar of the Philippines; and the Office of the Court Administrator for circulation to all courts in the country for their information and guidance.
>
> This Decision shall be immediately executory.
>
> **SO ORDERED**.3
