# AM-RTJ-09-2183

**CONCERNED LA WYERS OF BULACAN vs. PRESIDING JUDGE VICTORIA VILLALON-PORNILLOS, ETC.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: CONCERNED LA WYERS OF BULACAN vs. PRESIDING JUDGE VICTORIA VILLALON-PORNILLOS, ETC.
- **Ponente**: Per Curiam
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Resolution
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2017/feb2017/am_rtj-09-2183_2017.html)

---

> **EN BANC**
>
> **February 14, 2017**
>
> **A.M. No. RTJ-09-2183**
>
> **CONCERNED LAWYERS OF BULACAN,** Complainant
>
> vs.
> **PRESIDING JUDGE VICTORIA VILLALON-PORNILLOS, ETC.**, Respondent
>
> **RE: PETITION FOR JUDICIAL CLEMENCY OF THEN JUDGE VICTORIA VILLALON-PORNILLOS.**
>
> **R E S O L U T I O N**
>
> ***PER CURIAM:***
>
> For resolution is a petition for judicial clemency filed by Victoria Villalon-Pomillos (respondent), former Presiding Judge of the Regional Trial Court, Branch 10, Malolos City, Bulacan, through a letter1 dated December 28, 2016.
>
> **The Facts**
>
> On July 7, 2009, the Court rendered a Decision,2 dismissing respondent from service, after having been found guilty of gross misconduct, *i.e.,* borrowing money from a lawyer in a case pending before her court, aggravated by undue delay in rendering decisions or orders, and violation of Supreme Court rules, directives, and circulars. The dispositive portion of the subject Decision reads:
>
> **> WHEREFORE,**Judge Victoria Villalon-Pornillos, Presiding Judge of Branch 10 of the Regional Trial Court of Malolos City, is found guilty of violating paragraph 7, Section 8, Rule 140 of the Rules of Court (borrowing money from a lawyer in a case pending before her court) which is also a gross misconduct constituting violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct, aggravated by, *inter alia,* undue delay in rendering decision or orders, and violation of Supreme Court rules, directives and circulars. She is **DISMISSED** from the service, with forfeiture of all retirement benefits, except accrued leave credits, with prejudice to re-employment in any government agency or instrumentality. Immediately upon service on her of this decision, she is deemed to have vacated her office and her authority to act as judge is considered automatically terminated.
>
> SO ORDERED.3
