# GR-224302

**HON. PHILIP A. AGUINALDO, HON. REYNALDO A. ALHAMBRA, HON. DANILO S. CRUZ, HON. BENJAMIN T. POZON, HON. SALVADOR V. TIMBANG, JR., and the INTEGRATED BAR OF THE PHILIPPINES (IBP) vs. HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT BENIGNO SIMEON C. AQUINO III, HON. EXECUTIVE SECRETARY PAQUITO N. OCHOA, HON. MICHAEL FREDERICK L. MUSNGI, HON. MA. GERALDINE FAITH A. ECONG, HON. DANILO S. SANDOVAL, HON. WILHELMINA B. JORGE-WAGAN, HON. ROSANA FE ROMERO-MAGLAYA, HON. MERIANTHE PACITA M. ZURAEK, HON. ELMO M. ALAMEDA, and HON. VICTORIA C. FERNANDEZ-BERNARDO**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: HON. PHILIP A. AGUINALDO, HON. REYNALDO A. ALHAMBRA, HON. DANILO S. CRUZ, HON. BENJAMIN T. POZON, HON. SALVADOR V. TIMBANG, JR., and the INTEGRATED BAR OF THE PHILIPPINES (IBP) vs. HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT BENIGNO SIMEON C. AQUINO III, HON. EXECUTIVE SECRETARY PAQUITO N. OCHOA, HON. MICHAEL FREDERICK L. MUSNGI, HON. MA. GERALDINE FAITH A. ECONG, HON. DANILO S. SANDOVAL, HON. WILHELMINA B. JORGE-WAGAN, HON. ROSANA FE ROMERO-MAGLAYA, HON. MERIANTHE PACITA M. ZURAEK, HON. ELMO M. ALAMEDA, and HON. VICTORIA C. FERNANDEZ-BERNARDO
- **Ponente**: Leonardo-De Castro, J.
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Resolution
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2017/feb2017/gr_224302_2017.html)

---

> **Aguinaldo, et al. v. Aquino, III, et al.,** G.R. No. 224302, February 21, 2017
>
> ♦ Decision, Leonardo-De Castro, [J]
>
> ♦ Separate Opinion, Velasco, [J] Leonen, [J] Caguioa, [J]
>
> **EN BANC**
>
> **February 21, 2017**
>
> G.R. No. 224302
>
> **HON. PHILIP A. AGUINALDO, HON. REYNALDO A. ALHAMBRA, HON. DANILO S. CRUZ, HON. BENJAMIN T. POZON, HON. SALVADOR V. TIMBANG, JR., and the INTEGRATED BAR OF THE PHILIPPINES (IBP),** Petitioners
>
> vs.
> **HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT BENIGNO SIMEON C. AQUINO III, HON. EXECUTIVE SECRETARY PAQUITO N. OCHOA, HON. MICHAEL FREDERICK L. MUSNGI, HON. MA. GERALDINE FAITH A. ECONG, HON. DANILO S. SANDOVAL, HON. WILHELMINA B. JORGE-WAGAN, HON. ROSANA FE ROMERO-MAGLAYA, HON. MERIANTHE PACITA M. ZURAEK, HON. ELMO M. ALAMEDA, and HON. VICTORIA C. FERNANDEZ-BERNARDO**, Respondents
>
> **R E S O L U T I O N**
>
> **LEONARDO-DE CASTRO, *J.:***
>
> In its Decision dated November 29, 2016, the Court *En Banc* held:
>
> **> WHEREFORE**, premises considered, the Court **DISMISSES** the instant Petition for *Quo Warranto* and *Certiorari* and Prohibition for lack of merit. The Court **DECLARES** the clustering of nominees by the Judicial and Bar Council **UNCONSTITUTIONAL**, and the appointments of respondents Associate Justices Michael Frederick L. Musngi and Geraldine Faith A. Econg, together with the four other newly-appointed Associate Justices of the Sandiganbayan, as **VALID**. The Court further **DENIES** the Motion for Intervention of the Judicial and Bar Council in the present Petition, but **ORDERS** the Clerk of Court *En Banc* to docket as a separate administrative matter the new rules and practices of the Judicial and Bar Council which the Court took cognizance of in the preceding discussion as ***Item No. 2***: the deletion or non-inclusion in JBC No. 2016-1, or the Revised Rules of the Judicial and Bar Council, of Rule 8, Section 1 of JBC-009; and ***Item No. 3***: the removal of incumbent Senior Associate Justices of the Supreme Court as consultants of the Judicial and Bar Council, referred to in pages 3 5 to 40 of this Decision. The Court finally **DIRECTS** the Judicial and Bar Council to file its comment on said ***Item Nos. 2 and 3*** within thirty (30) days from notice.1
