# GR-RTJ-23-029

**RTJ-23-029 Securities and Exchange Commission, represented by Commissioner Emilio B. Aquino Vs. Hon. Oscar P. Noel, Jr., Presiding Judge, Branch 35, Regional Trial Court, General Santos City, South Cotabato**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: RTJ-23-029 Securities and Exchange Commission, represented by Commissioner Emilio B. Aquino Vs. Hon. Oscar P. Noel, Jr., Presiding Judge, Branch 35, Regional Trial Court, General Santos City, South Cotabato
- **Ponente**: Per Curiam
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Date**: February 14, 2019
- **Source**: [sc.judiciary.gov.ph](https://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/RTJ-23-029.pdf)

---

> ,Republic of tbe l}IJthppines
> $'>Upre1ne QI:ourt
> i/lllanila
> SECOND DIVISION
> SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> COl\~MlSSION, :represented by (Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> COMMISSIONER EMILIO B.
> AQUINO,
> Complainant, Present:
> - versus -
> LEONEN, S.A.J., Chairperson,
> HON. OSCAR P. NOEL, JR., LAZARO-JAVIER,
> Presiding Judge, Branch 35, LOPEZ,M.
> Regional Trial Court, General LOPEZ, J., and
> Santos City, South Cotabato, KHO, JR., JJ.
> Respondent.
> Promulgated:
> ~JAN 2 3 2023
> x-------------------------------------------------------------------------------·--------------------------x
> DECISION
> KHO, JR., J.:
> This administrative matter arose from a Cnmplaint 1 filed by
> complainant Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), represented by
> Commissioner Emilio B. Aquino, charging respondent Hon. Oscar P. Noel,
> Jr. (respondent), Presiding Judge of the Regional Trial Comi (RTC) of
> General Santos City, South Cotabato, Branch 35 with Gross Ignorance of the
> Law in connection with Special Civil Case No. 19-806, entitled "Kapa
> Communi~v Ministry International, Inc., represented by Pastor Joel A.
> Apolinario v. Securities and Exchange Commission" (subject case).
> 1 Rollo, pp. 2-l 7.
>
> Decision 2 A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> The Facts
> On February 14, 2019, the SEC issued a Cease and Desist Order
> (CDO)2 against Kapa-Community Ministry International, Inc. (KAPA ) after
> discovering that the latter was selling securities in the form of investment
> contracts, in violation of Republic Act No. (RA) 8799, othe1wise known as
> "The Securities Regulation Code" (SRC). 3 KAPA initially filed a motion
> before the SEC seeking the lifting of the CDO, but later on, withdrew the
> same. On March 1, 2019, KAPA filed the subject case4 for injunction with
> application for issuance of a temporary restraining order (TRO) and/or writ of
> preliminary injunction (WPI) before the RTC, essentially claiming that the
> CDO issued by the SEC violated its right to religious freedom. 5
> In an Order6 dated March 1, 2019, the RTC Branch 58 denied KAPA's
> prayer for a 72-hour TRO on the ground that its proper remedy is to file a
> motion to lift the CDO before the SEC. Thereafter, the subject case was raffled
> to the RTC Branch 35 where respondent sits as Presiding Judge. Thereafter,
> the following incidents occuned: (a) on March 12, 2019, the SEC was
> personally served with a Notice ofHearing7 for a hearing scheduled on March
> 13, 2019; (b) on March 13, 2019, the SEC filed a Manifestation (Ex Abudanti
> Ad Cautelanz )8 contending that the R TC had no jurisdiction over the subject
> matter of the case but respondent formally expunged the same9 on even date
> for violation of the Efficient Use of Paper Rule; (c) in an Order10 dated March
> 15, 2019, respondent granted KAPA 's prayer for a 20-day TRO on the ground
> that such prayer went unopposed, and proceeded to issue the same 11 on March
> 19, 2019; (d) in an Order12 dated April 4, 2019, respondent issued a WPI in
> favor of KAPA , again on the ground that such prayer went unopposed. In
> granting the TRO and WPI, respondent opined that the regular courts, and not
> the SEC, have jurisdiction over issues involving the constitutional right to the
> free exercise of religion; that the power of the SEC is limited to issues on
> securities trading; and that the TRO and WPI did not cover issues on securities
> because said matter was not raised by KAPA in its petition. 13
> 2 ld. at 21-35. Signed by Chairperson Emilio B. Aquino and concurred in by Commissioners Antonicta
> F. Tbe, Kelvin Lester K. Lee, and Javey Paul D. Francisco. Commissioner Ephyro Luis B. Amato11g was
> on official business.
> Approved on July 19, 2000.
> 4 See Petition for Injunction (with Application for the Issuance of a Temporary Rcstrnining Order and/or
> a Writ of Preliminary Injunction) dated March 1, 2019, rollo, pp. 99-129.
> 5 Id. at 366.
> 6 Id. at 171-174 . Signed by Judge Joyce Kho Mirabueno.
> 7 Id. at 175-176. Signed by Branch Clerk of Court Atty. Winston C. Pagador.
> 8 Id.atl77-l80.
> See Order dated March 13, 2019, id. at 202.
> 10 Id. at 196-198.
> 11 Id. at l 99.
> 12 Id. at 239-240.
> 13 ld.at366-367.
>
> Decision
> 3 A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> In light of the foregoing, the SEC filed the instant complaint for, inter
> alia, Gross Ignorance of the Law against respondent. Essentially, the SEC
> contended that it is a co-equal body of RTCs, and hence, the RTCs cannot
> interfere with or overturn its rulings. In this regard, the SEC pointed out
> Section 179 of RA 11232, otherwise known as the "Revised Corporation Code
> of the Philippines" (RCC),14 which provides that "[n]o comi below the Court
> of Appeals shall have jurisdiction to issue a restraining order, prelimina1y
> injunction, or preliminary mandatory injunction in any case, dispute, or
> controversy that directly or indirectly interferes with the exercise of the
> powers, duties and responsibilities of the Commission that falls exclusively
> within its jurisdiction." As such, respondent's acts of issuing a TRO and WPI
> against the CDO constitutes Gross Ignorance of the Law.15
> In his Comment, 16 respondent maintained that the charges against him
> were baseless and that the SEC has only itself to blame for failing to perform
> its duties of defending its position in comi. According to respondent, the SEC
> was duly notified of the hearings for the TRO and WPI but did not attend the
> same. Furthermore, respondent insisted that the R TC has jurisdiction over the
> subject case, considering that KAPA raised the constitutional issue of free
> exercise of religion, and did not delve on trading and securities. Finally,
> respondent posited that if the SEC does not agree with his orders, then it
> should have availed of the judicial remedies available to it under the Rules. 17
> The OCA Report and Recommendation
> In a Repmi 18 dated August 11, 2020, the Office of the Comi
> Administrator (OCA) recommended, among others, that respondent be
> found administratively liable for Gross Ignorance of the Law, and
> accordingly, be meted with the penalty of suspension from the service for
> a period of four months, with a stern warning that a repetition of the same
> or similar offense shall be dealt with more severely by the Court. 19
> Citing Section 179 of the RCC, the OCA held that RTCs have no
> authority to issue any restraining order that directly or indirectly interferes
> with the SEC' s exclusive powers and duties. According to the OCA,
> respondent's insistence that he only acted due to the possible curtailment
> of KAPA's right to religious freedom cannot be given any credence,
> considering that the circumstances of the case, particularly, that: (a) after
> the SEC's issuance of the CDO, KAPA initially moved before the SEC to
> 14 Approved on February 20, 2019.
> 15 Rollo, p. 368.
> 16 id.at333-337.
> 17 Id. at 368-369.
> 18 Id. at 366-372. Signed by then Court Administrator Jose Midas P. Marquez (now a Member of the Court)
> and SC Senior Chief Staff Officer Noe A. Pleuos on behalf of Deputy Court Administrator Leo T.
> Madrazo.
> IQ Jd. at 372.
>
> Decision 4 A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (Fonnerly OCA IPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> lift the sarne; and ( b) KAPA withdrew such motion, and instead, filed the
> subject case, show that I<AP A circumvented the procedure in filing the
> subject case in the guise of its alleged violation of its right to religious
> freedom. In this regard, the OCA opined that the RTC Branch 58's denial
> of the prayer for the issuance of the 72-hour TRO on the ground that
> KAPA's proper remedy is to file a motion to hfl the CDO before the SEC
> should have already put respondent on guard, and that he should have taken
> it upon himself to first ascertain whether he had the jurisdiction or the legal
> competence to act on a petition for injunction to prevent the enforcement
> of an order issued by a co-equal body. Despite the foregoing, respondent
> still issued the TRO and WPI, thereby committing Gross Ignorance of the
> Law.20
> Finally, the OCA pointed out that respondent had been previously
> found administratively liable for the same offense in two different
> instances where he was admonished and reprimanded, respectively. As
> such, he should be meted with a stiffer penalty given that this is his third
> infraction for Gross Ignorance of the Law.21
> The Issue Before the Court
> The issue for the Court's resolution is whether or not respondent
> should be held administratively liable for the acts complained of.
> The Court'§ Ruling
> The Court adopts the findings of the OCA with certain modifications,
> as will be explained below.
> I.
> At the outset, it is important to note that on February 22, 2022, the Court
> En Banc unanimously approved A.M. No. 21-08-09-SC, entitled "Further
> Amendments to Rule 140 of the Rules of Court." On April 3, 2022, the
> publicatio11 requirement thereof had already been complied with; 22 hence,
> Rule 140, as fi.niher amended (the Rules), is already effective.
> 20 Id. at 369-3 71.
> 21 ld. at 371.
> 22 Section 26 of the Rules reads:
> SECTION 26. E[fecliviiy Clause. -These Rules shall take effect following their
> publication in the Official Gazette or in hvo newspapers of national circulation.
> (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
>
> Decision
> 5 AM. No. RTJ-23-029
> (Fonnerly OCA lPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> In this relation, Section 24 of the Rules explicitly provides that it will
> apply to all pending and future administrative disciplinary cases involving
> Members, officials, employees, and personnel of the Judiciary, to wit:
> SECTION 24. Retroactive Effect. - All the foregoing provisions
> shall be applied to an pending and future administrative cases involving
> the discipline of Members, officials, employees, and personnel of the
> Judiciary, without prejudice to the internal rules of the Committee on
> Ethics and Ethical Standards of the Supreme Court insofar as complaints
> against Members of the Supreme Court are concerned. (Emphasis and
> underscoring supplied)
> In view of the foregoing, the Court shall resolve this case under the
> framework of the Rules.
> n.
> "Our conception of good judges has been, and is, of men who have a
> mastery of the principles oflaw, who discharge their duties in accordance with
> law. Judges are the visible representations of law and justice, from whom the
> people draw the will and inclination to obey the law. They are expected to be
> circumspect in the perfonnance of their tasks, for it is their duty to administer
> justice in a way that inspires confidence in the integrity of the justice
> system. Judges should exhibit more than just a cursory acquaintance with the
> statutes and procedural rnles, and should be diligent in keeping abreast with
> developments in law and jurisprudence. For, a judge who is plainly ignorant
> of the law taints the noble office and great privilege vested in him. "23 In
> Department a/Justice v. Mislang,24 the Comi elaborated on the administrative
> offense of Gross Ignorance of the Law as follows:
> Gross ignorance of the law is the disregard of basic rnles and
> settled. jurisprudence. A judge may also be administratively liable if
> shown to have been motivated by bad faith, fraud, dishonesty or corruption
> in ignoring, contradicting or failing to apply settled law and jurisprudence.
> Though not every _judicial c:rror bespeaks ignorance of the law and that,
> if committed in good faith, does not warrant administrative sanction,
> the same applies only in cases within the parameters of tolerable
> misjudgment. Such, however, is not the case with Judge Mislang. \Vhe:re
> the law is straightforward and the facts so evident, faillure to know it or
> to act as if one does not know it constitutes gross ignorance of the faw.
> A judge is presumed to have acted with regularity and good faith in the
> performance of judicial functions. But a blatant disregard of the dear
> and unmistakable provisions of a statute, as weU as Supreme Court
> 23 PhWppine National Construction Corporation v. A1upas, A.M. No. RT.T-20-2593, November 10, 2020
> [Per Curiam, En Banc]; citations omitted.
> 24 791 Phil. 219 (2016) [Per Curiam, En Banc].
>
> Decision 6 A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (fonnerly OCA IPI No. 19-4955-RT.l)
> circulars enjoining their strict compliance, upends this presumption
> and subjects the magistrate to corresponding administrative sanctions.
> For liability lo attach for ignorance of the law, the assailed order,
> decision or actuation of the judge in the perfonnance of official duties must
> not only be found erroneous but, most importantly, it must also be
> established that he was moved by bad faith, dishonesty, hatred, or some
> other like motive. Judges are expected to exhibit more than just cursory
> acquaintance with statutes and procedural laws. They must know the laws
> and apply them properly in all good faith. Judicial competence requires no
> less. Thus, unfamiliarity with the rules is a sign of incompetence. Basic
> mies must be at the palm of his hand. '1Vhcn a judge displays utter lack
> of familiarity with the rules, he betrays the confidence of the public in
> the courts. Ignorance of the law is the mainspring of injustice. Judges
> owe it to the public to be knowledgeable, hence, they are expected to have
> more than just a modicum of acquaintance with the statutes and procedural
> rules; they must know them by heart. When the inefficiency springs from
> a failure to recognize such a basic and elemental rule, a law or a
> principle in the discharge of his functions, a judge is either too
> incompetent undeserving of the position and the prestigious title he
> holds or he is too vicious that the oversight or omission was deliberately
> done in bad faith, and in grave abuse ofjudicial authority. In both cases,
> the judge's dismissal will be in order. 25 (Emphasis and underscoring
> supplied)
> However, it bears clarifying that "[w]hile judges should not be
> disciplined for inefficiency on account merely of occasional mistakes or errors
> of judgments, it is highly imperative that they should be conversant with
> fundamental and basic legal principles in order to merit the confidence of the
> citizenry. A patent disregard of simple, elementary and well-known rules
> constitutes Gross Ignorance of the Law."26 The Court's pronouncement in
> Enriquez v. Caminade27 is instructive on this matter, to wit:
> Judges are expected to exhibit more than just cursory acquaintance
> with statutes and procedural laws. In all good faith, they must know the laws
> and apply them properly. Judicial competence requires no less. Where the
> legal principle involved is sufficiently basic and elementary, lack of
> conversance with it constitutes gross ignorance of the law.28 (Emphasis
> and underscoring supplied)
> Othe1wise stated, "[w ]hen the law is sufficiently basic, a judge owes it
> to his office to know and to simply apply it. Anything less would be
> constitutive of gross ignorance of the law."29
> 25 ld. at 227-228.
> 26 Philippine National Co11stn1ctio11 Corporation l'. Mupas, supra; citations omitted.
> 27 519 Phil. 781 (2006) [Per C.J. Panganiban, First Divisionl
> 28 Id. at 783.
> 29 Philippine National Co11struclion Cmporation v. Mupas, supra, citing Cabili v. Balindong, 672 Phil.
> 398,412 (2011) [Per Curiam, En Banc].
>
> Decision 7 A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (formerly OCA IPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> '
> Here, it is well to recapitulate that after the SEC issued a CDO against
> KAP A for selling securities in the form of investment contracts in violation
> of the SRC, KAPA initially sought for the lifting of the CDO before the SEC,
> but eventually withdrew its motion. Thereafter, KAP A filed the subject case
> seeking that the implementation of the CDO be restrained on the purported
> ground that it violates KAPA's right to religious freedom. While the RTC
> Branch 58 denied the prayer for a 72-hour TRO, maintaining that KAPA's
> proper remedy is to seek for its lifting before the SEC, the RTC Branch 35,
> where respondent sits as Presiding Judge, took cognizance of the case and
> even issued a 20-day TRO, and later on, a WPI in KAPA's favor and against
> the CDO.
> At this juncture, it is worthy to note that "[a]s comis of general
> jurisdiction, the RTC ordinarily exercise exclusive original jurisdiction over
> civil actions incapable of pecuniary estimation, such as that of accounting,
> cancellation of certificates of sale issued in foreclosure proceedings and
> injunction. Nevertheless, the scope of such general jurisdiction cannot be
> extended over matters falling under the special jurisdiction of another court
> or quasi-judicial body." 30 Relatedly, under prevailing laws, rules, and
> jurisprudence, it is a basic rule that pursuant to its exercise of quasi-judicial
> jurisdiction, i.e., the issuance of CDOs, the SEC stands as a co-equal bodv of
> the RTCs; hence. all orders and issuances issued by the SEC in the exercise
> of such i u risdiction may not be interfered with, let a/gne overturned. by the
> RTCs. 31 The foregoing rnle, which stems from "the doctrine of judicial
> stability or non-interference in the regular orders or judgments of a co-equal
> court, is an elementary principle in the administration of justice: no court can
> interfere by injunction with the judgments or orders of another court of
> concunent jurisdiction having the power to grant the relief sought by the
> injunction. The rationale for the rule is founded on the concept of jurisdiction:
> a court that acquires jurisdiction over the case and renders judgment therein
> has jurisdiction over its judgment, to the exclusion of all other coordinate
> courts, for its execution and over all its incidents, and to control, in furtherance
> of justice, the conduct of ministerial officers acting in connection with this
> judgment."32 Further, "[t]his rule of non-interference applies not only to
> courts oflaw having equal rank but also to quasi-judicial agencies statutorily
> at par with such courts. "33
> 30 Rizal Commercial Banking Cmporation v. Plast-Print Industries, Inc., G.R. No. 199308, June 19, 2019
> [Per .l. Caguioa, Second Division], citing Section 19 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, otherwise known as
> the "JudiciCIJJ' Reorganization Act of 1980."
> 11 See id., citing Philippine Pacific Fishing Co., inc. v. Luna, 198 Phil. 301,314 (1982) [Per .I. Barredo,
> Second Division].
> 32 Cabifi v. Balindong, supra at 406-407; citations omitted.
> 33 Philippine Telegraph & Telephone Corp. v. Smart Communications, Inc., 799 Phil. 78, 93 (2016) [Per
> .J. Jardeleza, Third Division], citing Municipality ofMalolos v. Libangang Malnlos, Inc., 247 Phil. 254
> (1988) [Per J. Melencio-Herrcrra, Second Division]; emphasis and underscoring supplied.
>
> Decision 8 A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (Formerly OCA lPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> Furthermore, and as aptly pointed out by the SEC, and later on, the
> OCA, Section 179 of the RCC pertinently states that "[n ]o court below the
> Court of Appeals shall have jurisdiction to issue a restraining order,
> preliminary injunction, or preliminary mandatory injunction in any case,
> dispute, or controversy that directly or indirectly interferes with the exercise
> of the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Commission that falls
> exclusively within its jurisdiction." Notably, the RCC took effect on February
> 23, 2019,34 or prior to KAPA 's filing of the subject case on March 1, 2019.
> Based on the foregoing, respondent should have refrained from acting
> on the subject case - as what the Presiding Judge of RTC Branch 58 did.
> Despite these, respondent still issued a 20-day TRO, and later on, a WPI in
> KAPA's favor and against the CDO issued by the SEC, a co-equal body.
> More significantly, respondent violated the doctrine on primary
> jurisdiction. To be sure, this doctrine states that "courts cannot or will not
> determine a controversy involving a question which is within the jurisdiction
> of the administrative tribunal prior to the resolution of that question by the
> administrative tribunal, where the question demands the exercise of sound
> administrative discretion requiring the special knowledge, experience, and
> services of the administrative tribunal to determine technical and intricate
> matters of fact."35 To recapitulate, the SEC issued the CDO against KAPA
> selling securities in the form of investment contracts, in violationof RA 8799
> - a special law, the enforcement of which is particularly vested in the SEC.36
> Thus, primary jurisdiction over this 111atter clearly falls within the SEC, and it
> was a grave enor for respondent to have issued the said 20-day TRO and WPI.
> In an attempt to absolve himself from administrative liability,
> respondent insisted, inter alia, that RTC has jurisdiction over the subject case,
> considering that KAP A raised the constitutional issue of free exercise of
> religion, and did not delve on trading and securities. However, the Court finds
> such insistence untenable for the simple reason that respondent cannot feign
> ignorance of the fact that his issuance of a TRO and WPI in the subject case
> will have the effect of restraining the enforcement of the CDO issued by the
> SEC, a co-equal body .
> .14 See SEC Notice dated February 28, 2019, available al <hHps://www.scc.gov.ph/wp-
> contenl/uploacls/2019/l l/2019Legislation RevisedCoqiorationCocleEffectivity.pclf> (last visited
> December 15, 2022).
> 35 Kifusang Mayo Uno v. Hon. Aquino, 850 Phil. 1168 (2019) [Per J. Leonen, En Banc], citing Republic v.
> Gallo, 823 Phil. 1090 (2018) [Per J. Leonen, Third Division].
> 36 See Section 4 of RA 8799. See also Baviera v. Paglinawan, 544 Phil. 107 (2007) [Per J. Sandoval
> Gutierrez, first Division].
>
> Decision
> 9 A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> Verily, respondent's "lack of familiarity with the rules in interfering
> with the acts of a co-equal body undermines public confidence in the
> [J]udiciary through his demonstrated incompetence."37 Thus, it is only proper
> that respondent be found administratively liable for Gross Ignorance of the
> Law.
> III.
> Respondent's administrative liability for Gross Ignorance of the Law
> having been established, the Court now goes to the proper imposable penalty
> on him.
> Under the Rules, Gross Ignorance of the Law is a serious charge38
> which is punishable by any of the following penalties found under Section 17
> ( 1) of the Rules, i.e.: (a) dismissal from service, forfeiture of all or part of the
> benefits as the Supreme Court may determine, and disqualification from
> reinstatement or appointment to any public office, including government
> owned or -controlled corporations. Provided, lunvever, that the forfeiture of
> benefits shall in no case include accrued leave credits; (b) suspension from
> office without salary and other benefits for more than six months but not
> exceeding one year; or (c) a fine of more than Pl00,000.00 but not exceeding
> P200,000.00.
> Fmiher, Section 19 (2) (a) of the Rules provides that a "[f]inding of
> previous administrative liability where a penalty is imposed, regardless of
> nature and/or gravity" is considered as an aggravating circumstance.
> Relatedly, Section 20 of the Rules instructs that "[i]f one (1) or more
> aggravating circumstances and no mitigating circumstances are present, the
> Supreme Court may impose the penalties of suspension or fine ('or a period
> or amount not exceeding double of the maximum prescribed under this
> Rule."39
> Here, the OCA pointed out that respondent had been previously found
> administratively liable for Gross Ignorance of the Law, namely: (a) in BIR v.
> Noel, Jr. 40 where he was admonished; and (b) in Rodriguez v. Noel, Jr. 41
> where he was reprimanded and sternly warned that a repetition of the same or
> similar acts shall be dealt with more severely by the Court. However, for
> purposes of aggravating respondent's administrative liability here, only the
> latter case shall be taken into consideration, pursuant to the relevant
> annotation to the Rules which reads:
> 37 Cabili v. Balindo11g, supra note 29, at 411.
> 38 See Section 14 (j) of the Rules.
> 39 Emphasis and underscoring supplied.
> -1-o See Notice Resolution in A.M. No. RTJ-12-2311, February 6, 2012.
> +t See Notice of Resolution in A.M. No. RTJ-18-2525, June 25, 2018.
>
> Decision A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (Formerly OCA IPI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> Finally, the phrase "where a penalty is imposed" is added to exclude
> · previous administrative oroceedings involving respom:lent where he or
> she was merely admonished or warned, in light ofc ase law which provides
> that admonition and warning are not considered as penalties. (Tobias v.
> Veloso, 188 Phil. 267 [1980]; In the Jlfatter oft he Conternpt Orders Against
> Lt. Gen. Jose M. Calimlim and At(v. Domingo A. Doctor, Jr., 584 Phil. 377
> [2008]; Samahan ng mga Progresibong Kabataan v. Quezon City, 815 Phil.
> 1067 [2017]).
> At this juncture, the Comi notes that this is already the third bme that
> respondent is being held administratively liable for Gross Ignorance of the
> Law. This notwithstanding, the Court opts, at ]east for this instance, to stay its
> hand in imposing the supreme penalty of dismissal from the service on
> respondent. This is considering that the purpose of administrative cases
> against public officials is not necessarily to penalize -- but rather, "to exact
> accountability for the wrongful acts that they have committed in the
> performance of their official functions"42 with the aim of "restor[ing] and
> preserv[ing] the public trust in our institutions."43 In light of the foregoing, the
> Court finds it appropriate to impose on respondent the penalty of suspension
> from office without sala1y and other benefits for a period of two years, again
> with a stern warning that a repetition of the same or similar acts shall be dealt
> with more severely. This goes without saying that should respondent be found
> administratively liable for the same offense in the future, then the Court might
> no longer temper the penalties that may be meted on him.
> As a final note, the Com1 reiterates that "[n ]o less than the Constitution
> states that a member of the judiciary 'must be a person of proven competence,
> integrity, probity and independence.' It is, therefore, highly imperative that a
> judge should be conversant with basic legal principles. When a judge displays
> an utter lack of familiarity with the 1ules, he erodes the public's confidence in
> the competence of our comis."44 As such, he or she must be disciplined
> accordingly, as in this case.
> ACCORDINGLY, the Court finds respondent Oscar P. Noel, Jr.,
> Presiding Judge of the Regional Trial Court of General Santos City, South
> Cotabato, Branch 35, GUILTY of Gross Ignorance of the Law. He is hereby
> SUSPENDED from office without salary and other benefits for a period of
> two years, and is STERNLY WARNED that a repetition of the same or
> similar acts shall be dealt with more severely.
> 42 Dissenting Opinion of SAJ Perlas-Bernabe in Concepcion F. Castaiieda, A.M. No. RTJ-15-2438,
> September 2, 2020.
> 43 Concepcion v. Castai'icda, A.M. No. RTJ-15-2438, September 2, 2020 [Per .I. Leonen, En Banc].
> -1 4 Philippine National Construction Corporation v. Mupas, supra note 23; citations omitted.
>
> Decision 1 I A.M. No. RTJ-23-029
> (Formerly OCA !PI No. 19-4955-RTJ)
> Let a copy of this Decismn attached to the personal record of
> bf;
> respondent judge.
> SO ORDERED.
> ..~·/ ..... ~~fiim6-;;~0~--
> ,.~
> Associate Justice
> \VE CONClJR:
> Senior Associate Justice
> Division Chairperson
> /IL
> (
> '
> ~
> . . .. .,....--_7---
> AMY LA_tiRO-JAv mR
> .L'\:ssociate Justice
> JHOSE~Ol.'EZ
> Associate Justice
