
Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT
Cotabato City

Second BTA
First Regular Session

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 67

Introduced by:
MP Marjanie S. Macasalong, MP Ubaida C. Pacasem, CPA
and MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil

Co-authors:
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA, TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG, ABDULLAH E. GAYAK, AIDAH M. SILONGAN, ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, SAID M. SHIEK, BASIT S. ABBAS, KHALID M. HADJI ABDULLAH, AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, KADIL M. SINOLINDING, MUJIB C. ABU, ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN, MARY ANN M. ARNADO, RAMON ALEJANDRO PIANG SR., AKMAD I. ABAS, HARON M. ABAS, IBRAHIM D. ALI, BAILENG S. MANTAWIL, MATARUL M. ESTINO, SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, RASUL Y. MITMUG, ALI O. SALIK, ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO, RASUL E. ISMAEL, JAAFAR APOLLO MIKHAIL L. MATALAM, ABDULAZIS M. AMENODIN, NABIL A. TAN, SUSANA S. ANAYATIN, NURREDHA I. MISUARI, JOSE I. LORENA, MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO, MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN, HATIMIL E. HASSAN, BENJAMIN T. LOONG, DIAMILA D. RAMOS, DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, AND BAE MALEIHA B. CANDAO

A RESOLUTION

CONGRATULATING THE PARTICIPANTS FROM THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM) IN THE 2022 SMART/MVP SPORTS FOUNDATION NATIONAL INTERSCHOOL TAEKWONDO CHAMPIONSHIPS FOR BRINGING HOME TWENTY (20) NATIONAL MEDALS TO THE REGION

WHEREAS, it is the Bangsamoro Government's policy to promote physical education program and encourage sports program, league competitions, and amateur sports, including training for regional, national and international competitions, to foster discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry;

WHEREAS, the 2022 Smart/MVP Sports Foundation National Interschool Taekwondo Championships was organized by the Philippine Taekwondo Association (PTA) on October 1-2, at the Ayala Malls, Manila Bay, Pasay City;

WHEREAS, the competition, supported by Philippine Sports Commission, Philippine Olympics Committee and Milo, comprises of two categories-the kyurogi (sparring) and pomsae (form);¹

WHEREAS, Taekwondo is the art of self-defense that originated in Korea, and is recognized as one of the oldest forms of martial arts in the world;²

WHEREAS, about two thousand students from school affiliated with the PTA all over the country participated in the biggest school-based tournament in the country;³

WHEREAS, students from ten (10) different schools in BARMM trained by the Heart of the Champion (HOTC) Team won twenty (20) medals in the said national taekwondo competition;

WHEREAS, the team bagged six (6) gold medals, two (2) silver, and twelve (12) bronze;

WHEREAS, the following students who competed in the Kyurogi events are commended:
a. Gold Medalists (2)
i. Guthrie Ferrer
ii. Arran Ace Ambasa

b. Silver Medalist (1)
i. Aevemelech Monteclaro

c. Bronze Medalists (7)
i. Maharani Cabanban Sali
ii. Arol Kris De Guzman
iii. Jabbar Abdul
iv. Laleina Eowyn Chiong
v. Kyzelle Mea Mijares
vi. Dhan Joseph Eligio
vii. Frances Antonette Dela Cruz;

WHEREAS, for the Pomsae event, the following students are likewise recognized:
a. Gold Medalists (4)
i. Althea Laureigne Juanitez Juachon
ii. Sittie Shamera C. Samanodin
iii. Jabbar Abdul
iv. Dhan Joseph Eligio

b. Silver Medalist (1)
i. Arran Ace Ambasa

c. Bronze Medalists (5)
i. Aevemelech Monteclaro
ii. Guthrie Ferrer
iii. Kyzelle Mea Mijares
iv. Maharani Cabanban Sali
v. Allayza Camille De Guzman;

WHEREAS, the Bangsamoro Parliament also recognizes Robert John Cabañog for bringing home the Best Male Referee Special Award, and the two HOTC coaches, Byrin B. Betita and Jan Rae Mijares Cañabano;

WHEREAS, the following ten (10) schools from BARMM are also appreciated for their support and effort for their participants:
a. Saint Francis Episcopal School of Upi, Inc.
b. Notre Dame of Upi, Inc.
c. Notre Dame of Cotabato
d. Camp Siongco National High School
e. Cotabato State University- University Laboratory School
f. Sero Central Elementary School
g. Datu Candido Andong Elementary School
h. Broce Central Elementary School
i. Pedro C. Dolores Elementary School
j. Borongotan Elementary School;⁴

NOW THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED, as it is hereby resolved, to congratulate the participants from the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) in the 2022 Smart/MVP Sports Foundation National Interschool Taekwondo Championships for bringing home twenty (20) national medals to the region;

RESOLVED, FURTHER, to also recognize the Home of the Champion (HOTC) trainors and referees as well as the schools which sent participants to the said event.

Adopted, ________.

Authors:

(Signature)
MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG
Member of Parliament

MP ATTY. UBAIDA C. PACASEM, CPA
Member of Parliament

MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL
Member of Parliament

