
**Complexity Management**

**Introduction**

It is often said that we live in an increasingly complex world, the pace of change, the degree of connectivity and the scale of operations are leading to rapidly escalating complexity in many domains. As our industrial age systems of organization are ending their life cycle, globalization, and information technology are taking us into a much more complex world and enabling the emergence of new forms of networked organization. This transition is in turn driving a fundamental transformation in our theory and methods of management, one that goes beyond our traditional paradigm designed for dealing with relatively static, hierarchical organizations within relatively stable and predictable environments, to more complex networked organizations that are adapted to operating in a so-called VUCA world of volatility, uncertainty and rapid change driven by innovation.

This book is a first of its kind bringing together some of the latest ideas from complexity theory and emerging approaches to the management of complex organizations. During this book we will explore many of these new ideas including, network organizations, co-evolution, systems thinking, platform organizations, agile development, and the adaptive cycle to name just a few. The book is broken down into five main sections.

**Complexity & Management**

We will start the book off with an overview of complexity and management, talking briefly about what we mean by the practice of management before going on to take an introduction to the basic concepts from complexity theory that we will be using throughout the rest of the book such as self-organization, networks, evolution, and systems. We then combine our new understanding of both to take an overview of how complexity theory is being applied to management.

**Systems Thinking**

The second section is dedicated to systems thinking. The paradigm of systems thinking is at the heart of managing complexity as it helps us to see the whole and not simply the parts, a key requirement for understanding and managing these highly interconnected and interdependent systems. We firstly give an overview of systems thinking, we talk about the key concept of emergence before going In this Turn, I will conclude the transcription of the document.

Picking up from where the transcription left off in the previous turn:

...on to explore the system dynamics modeling framework that helps us to understand the nonlinear feedback loops that drive change in complex organizations.

**Networked Organizations**

In the next section we explore this new type of networked organization that we see emerging in post-industrial economies, new types of platform organizations that go beyond the industrial age model, enabled by information technology, they are networked in structure, collaborative by nature, open and self-organizing. In this section, we explore the DNA of these new forms of organization contrasting them with our more traditional form to understand their key attributes.

**Complex Project Management**

In the fourth section to the book, we will see how a very different approach to our traditional linear project management methods are needed when projects reach a high degree of complexity. We will look at so-called "wicked problems" a new breed of very complex challenges such as climate change, inequality or cyber security, all of which share the key characteristics of complexity. We will look at the methods presented by complexity management designed for managing these large projects, under volatile and uncertain conditions.

**The VUCA Framework**

The net result of the complex environment that we explored in the previous sections is what the business world calls VUCA. VUCA is an acronym for volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity; it captures the most salient challenges faced by leaders operating in complex environments. In this last section, we introduce the concept of VUCA and give an overview to strategies for navigating these challenging environments, through the development of adaptive and agile organizations.

**Readership**

This book is designed as an introduction to the subject, concepts are explored in non-technical terms, and it will require only a basic background knowledge of management and economics. The book should be relevant for those engaged in all areas of management both public and private.

**Complexity Management**
**An Overview**

**Overview**

In this section we give a high-level overview to the domain of complexity management. We can understand complexity management as the application of complexity theory to the practice of management. Thus it draws upon the key insights and ideas from complexity science and uses them to try and help us manage complex organizations, examples of these complex organizations would include, cities, international politics, multinational corporations, global logistics networks or healthcare systems. These are all complex organizations due to their nature of having many parts that are highly interconnected, interdependent and autonomous.

We can, and do, go on using our traditional industrial age management approach to try and manage these organizations, but the basic principles underlying our traditional management approach were designed for dealing with relatively simple systems - that is organizations that have a limited number of components, that interact in a simple linear fashion at a low level of interconnectivity and where we can constrain those components. A factory would be a classical example of this and it should be not surprising that the industrial age management approach was designed to manage relatively simple closed systems like factories because that was exactly what we had to do a hundred or two hundred years ago when this approach was formalized. But today in postindustrial economies managing factories, as important as it is, is really the least of our concerns, we face much more complex challenges such as trying to get our healthcare systems working, enabling effective forms of governance, or collaboration between companies across large supply chains.

These are all very different forms of organization that present a different set of challenges and require a more complex approach to management that is aligned with their core attributes. And we already see lots of innovation in management theory to meet this, we have seen the rise of a new set of ideas around agile and lean organizations, many different ideas around flipping the hierarchy upside down and creating networked organizations, and lots of innovation in creating more collaborative organizations. But most of these new management theories can be best understood within the context of complexity theory, as they all fit within the complexity framework. In the rest of this section we outline what that framework is, that is to say, the key concepts within complexity theory and how they apply to management. Although complexity theory consists of a whole zoo of new ideas we will structure it around a few central concepts, namely, systems thinking, nonlinearity, networks and adaptation and evolution.

"Any idea that there is one answer, one simple magic formula, one explanation, one force at work, we have to put that aside, we have to embrace complexity because we are talking about complicated, interconnected set of relations of a world economy that now spans all parts of the world and connects all people, all businesses all technologies, flows of trade, finance, ideas, advertising, production systems, but also connects us with the physical earth in unprecedented ways" - Jeffrey Sachs Economist

**Systems Thinking**

Firstly, complexity management is based on the systems thinking paradigm. Put simply systems theory or systems thinking is a holistic way of looking at the world, this paradigm posits that the parts to a system can only be properly understood, and thus managed, when taken in relation to the whole system. Whereas our traditional analytic approach takes a system and breaks it down, focusing on the individual parts of the organization, systems thinking looks instead at the relationship between the parts and the context or environment within which something exists.

Whereas our traditional analytical approach is focused on closed well-bounded organizations, systems theory is instead looking more at open systems, that is to say, organizations that have so much interaction and exchange with their environment that we can't model them as being closed. And this is the nature of complex organizations they are really open networks instead of closed well bounded formal organizations.

Think about a healthcare system, it is a complex network of many different organizations and individuals, from primary care practitioners to hospital administration, to government agencies to universities and so on, all of them are interdependent in effecting the outcome to that system, the boundaries are fuzzy or even nonexistent. For example, would we include the food companies in this organization, as what they produce clearly has a direct impact on people's health, would we include the clean air lobby group as air quality would also have an effect on people's health? Another example would be global supply chains where we have to get many independent organizations across the value network to collaborate for the whole supply chain to function effectively, this supply chain has no real boundaries to it and no one is in control of the whole organization. The same would be true for international politics and many more forms of complex organization. This is the nature of complex organizations there is no real boundary to them and this makes them quite different in nature to our traditional well-bounded organizations, because they have no real boundary it is more relevant to talk about them as systems, or networks of connections.

So the question is then how do we actually manage this form of open organization where we don't really have control over the members, but still they are interdependent and we need to get a functioning global outcome from the system for the end user. The problem being that our traditional reductionist approach is predicated upon actually being able to directly itemize and control the members of the organization. Our traditional approach works by creating a boundary around the organization and a hierarchy within the organization, where top management then decide what is best for the entire organization and the members are constrained and coordinated towards that predefined outcome, in such a way we get global coordination. Sufficed to say this does not work in open organizations, global macro level patterns in complex systems are emergent phenomena of local level interactions that give rise to self-organization. Thus instead of directly aligning the actions of the members towards the desired global outcome, we create the context or platform within which the members can interact so as to coordinate locally and out of this we will get the emergence of some global organization. Thus for managers this means creating the context that facilitates the process of self-organization to take place, we can't directly control the outcome to the system but we can influence the initial conditions. We do this by creating a conducive context that represents an attractor towards coordination and cooperation between members. The big idea here is that of collaboration, we no longer have control but we can enable the context and conditions for collaboration.

**Nonlinearity**

Next, nonlinearity and interdependence which are key concepts within systems and complexity theory. As we turn up the connectivity the parts to the organization become more interdependent and this is something we are currently witnessing around the world with the rise of IT and globalization. Interdependence creates nonlinearity, when we put two or more things together and they become interdependent they can work together constructively or inversely they can counteract each other. Creating a combined organization that is more or less than the sum of its parts, 1 and 1 stops adding up to two and linear thinking starts to break down.

It should come as no surprise to you when I say our traditional management methods are very much based on linear thinking. We look for linear cause and effect interactions to describe events, and in reality, we will often go on using simple linear cause and effect descriptions of events when they don't really work, simply so that we don't have to deal with the complexity behind a situation. We go on talking about GDP when we all know this is a very blunt linear metric that hides the complex set of interacting variables to a society's overall quality of life. We go on looking at maps of the world divided up into nation states when this simple linear model hides the much more complex set of networks that make up our global economy and society. Linear thinking works well in simple environments and it is a necessary competency to being an effective manager. But it is not sufficed, in complex environments, we need to be able to recognize that it can hinder us in dealing with the real dynamics to the situation, and thus in such situations be prepared to switch to a more complex nonlinear form of reasoning.

Complexity management would posit that most complex phenomena that we encounter are the product of a number of different variables interacting in a specific nonlinear fashion, they are amplifying or dampening each other to give us the overall emergent outcome. Because no one single thing causes the outcome we can not simply solve the problem by affecting one input variable, we need to identify and effect the multiple relevant factors. So, for example, let's apply some nonlinear thinking to our current challenge of global terrorism which is clearly a very complex problem.

A linear cause and effect approach would be to simply exert superior military forces against the enemy, and that cause would effect the desired outcome that we wish, the eradication of terrorism. We might note that in this approach we are looking at the problem as independent from us and other things, it simply exists out there and we can just go and solve it with a single cause.

Now if we treated this phenomenon as complex and nonlinear, we would be looking less at the actual phenomenon itself and more at the network of interdependencies that are generating it, including a recognition of our own interdependence in this issue. That is to say, what role do our actions play in causing this problem and also remembering that events in time feedback on themselves, current events are path-dependent, meaning they are typically conditioned by feedback from historical events.

Using this nonlinear paradigm we would have to look at how the nexus of education interacts with religion and global culture, you would have to look at the socio-political dynamics in the region and of course how economics and corruption interact with poverty, food prices and so on. All of which interact in a constructive or destructive fashion to produce this emergent outcome.

So this should help to illustrate why it is called complexity management because really before anything it is about accepting that not all things are simple, some things are, but some things are truly complex, and trying to treat them as if they are not, does not change the situation. You really have to roll up your sleeves and dig into all the specific interacting parts but also understand the system as a whole. This is the only way you really solve difficult problems. There is no silver bullet here, but on the other hand, if you do actually understand how things work and you are prepared to do all the hard work then complexity theory does provide us with a framework that actually makes it possible to solve problems that otherwise are virtually impossible.

"In our past three global CEO studies, CEOs consistently said that coping with change was their most pressing challenge. In 2010, our conversations identified a new primary challenge: complexity. CEOs told us they operate in a world that is substantially more volatile, uncertain and complex" - IBM Global CEO Study

**Networks**

Next network theory is another central part of complexity science as it deals with the highly interconnected architecture of real-world complex systems, such as transportation networks, financial markets or ecosystems. With the rise of the Internet, we are seeing the birth of new forms of network organizations and the so-called access economy. Open platforms ...like Airbnb, The App Store, Uber and many others have shot to fame taking over or creating whole new industries, the networked platform model is proving highly scalable and they are currently disrupting many industries.

With the reduction in transaction cost that IT enables, these networked organizations are able to harness new value sources and access whole new markets that were previously not possible within the closed formal organization, whose cost of coordination was too high to reach out to the mass of people. These networked platforms are instead able to harness the small, but when combined vast productive capabilities of the so-called crowd, or long tail, the mass of people that were previously not productive enough to organize formally, are now able to set up their own networks of collaboration, and we are seeing a new mode of production within society, sometimes call peer-production or mass collaboration, classical examples being Wikipedia or the Linux foundation. A much more dynamic swarm-like form of organization.

The access economy is a major paradigm shift from ownership of products to access to services. In the same way hyperconnectivity is unlocking a vast amount of untapped productivity of the crowd on the long tail, it also has the potential to do the same to virtually every product around us. We can think of all the products around us as both things and the function they perform, the industrial economic model was all about ownership of things. That monolithic ownership worked to lockup the functionality of the product, meaning that the function was only accessed a fraction of the time, a good example being the typical car that is used on average less than like 5% of the time. With the reduction in transaction costs and the proliferation of networks, we can now think of products as services and economies not as being about the buying and selling of products but instead about access to value. The access economy requires us to change our management approach, to think in terms of access, connectivity and networks and network theory gives us the language to do that.

**Adaptation**

Finally, adaptation and evolution, with fast-paced technology innovation, globalization and changes in our supporting ecosystem, the post-industrial world is no longer a stable predictable environment it once might have been. It is marked by what business leaders call VUCA, standing for volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity.

Our traditional centralized organizations are normalized for stable and predictable environments and are inept at dealing with fast-paced change, or nonlinear radical events. but fast-paced change and radical events are becoming the new norm as the world becomes more interconnected and dynamic. And this is congruent with what complexity theory tells us about the capacity for nonlinear systems to generate black swan events and the butterfly effect. As we see more indicators becoming exponential we also see a shift from normal distributions to long tail distributions, that generate many more events that are several standard deviations from the norm such as financial crisis or extreme weather phenomena. We currently see a lot of creative destruction as companies in the S&P 500 are lasting shorter and shorter periods of time. The primary focus of organizations within this disruptive environment should be survival through building adaptive capacity to enable their evolution.

This VUCA world requires a recalibration of many dimensions to our approach to management, a fundamental shift from resisting change to adapting to it. This requires a new set of capabilities surrounding adaptive capacity, the capacity for the organization to evolve new solutions in response to their changing environment. Adaptation involves a recognition of uncertainty, that is, that we can not fully know future outcomes. This idea of uncertainty runs very much contrary to our traditional management approach, in fact, it is so alien that in economics we typically call it radical uncertainty, but radical uncertainty is really just normal old uncertainty, it just looks radical because our standard analytical approach leads us to think that the future should be knowable.

We conceive of the future in terms of some linear transformation of the past, what is called ergodicity, we take a sample from the past and use it to compute future outcome probabilities, and most of our business analysis and particularly our financial analysis, is dependent upon this idea of ergodicity, that the future is knowable. But when things get more nonlinear and complex, ergodicity doesn't really hold, as the system evolves we get nonlinear interactions between events that have not even emerged yet. Try turning the clock back twenty or thirty years and predicting how the Internet would unfold, how we would get the emergence of smartphones, that would give rise to the app economy, that would enable big data and all the future possibilities that will emerge out of that. This is not really possible because of the nonlinear interactions and the emergent evolutionary dynamic to the system's development. In such a case our strategy needs to change from one of trying to predict the future to adapting to it as it unfolds.

Adaptation means being open to uncertainty and maintaining a diversity of states in order to be able to respond to a variety of possible outcomes that are as yet unknown, it requires an evolutionary approach that involves experimenting, testing, and rapid iteration. In a word, it requires business agility, agile organizations and we are currently seeing how the idea of enterprise agility has gone from nowhere to being identified as one of the few top-level strategic enterprise capabilities.

"If the situation is complex, don’t waste time trying to work out what the solution is, any one with a coherent hypothesis about what might work gets a small amount of funding to run a controlled safe to fail experiment and those experiments run in parallel and then the patterns of potential success evolve or present themselves to senior management" - David Snowden Cognitive Edge

**Systems Thinking**
A paradigm which posits that the parts to a system can only be properly understood when taken in relation to the whole system. Focuses on bottom-up self-organization and the emergence of patterns

**Nonlinearity**
Outcomes are the product of a number of different variables interacting in nonlinear fashion, where they are amplifying or dampening each other to give us the overall emergent outcome

**Networks**
Organizations and value are no longer interpreted in terms of static structure but instead in terms of access, and management approaches have to shift to focus on access and connectivity

**Adaptation**
Being open to uncertainty and maintaining a diversity in order to be able to respond to a variety of possible outcomes that are as yet unknown. An evolutionary approach that involves experimenting, testing, and rapid iteration

**Complex Systems**
**Key Features**

**Overview**

In this paper we will be trying to give a clear outline to some of the basic concepts within complexity theory and the difference between simple linear systems and complex systems.

Firstly, complex systems are a type of system. A system is a set of things that are interdependent in performing some collective function. So the human body is a system in that it consists of many individual organs that work together as a functioning entirety. A business is another example of a system – many different individuals and departments functioning as an integrated unit, to collectively produce some set of products or services. And of course, there are many other examples of systems such as transportation systems, ecosystems, information systems and so on.

Not everything is a system though. If we take a random collection of things, say a hard drive, a light, and a watch and put them together, this is not a system. It is simply a set of elements because they are not interconnected and interdependent in performing some collective function. It is because of the fact that the elements within a system perform some collective function that systems are said to be greater than the sum of their parts, that is to say, that the system as a whole has properties and functionality that none of its constituent elements possess. A plant cell is an example of this. It is composed of many inanimate molecules, but when we put these together we get a cell that has the properties of a living system. So it is not any element that has the properties of life but it is the particular way that we arrange these molecules that gives rise to this emergent property of the living system as an entirety.

This is a very quick overview to the idea of a system, but systems can be defined as either simple linear systems or complex nonlinear systems. They are classified like this because each has very different properties and behavior and thus how we approach trying to study, design or manage them changes fundamentally. All systems start out simple and they evolve to become complex. Systems have a number of properties that make them more or less complex. These include the number of elements within the system, the level of interdependency between elements, the degree of connectivity between those elements and their degree of autonomy and diversity. Turning these properties to the system up or down makes them more or less complex, so we will go over each of these in more detail.

**1. Numerosity**

Firstly, the number of elements within our system. The more parts there are to our organization, the more complex it will be. In true complex systems the number of elements is for all intensive purposes virtually infinite, think of the number of devices within a city, it is so many that we could not itemize them. Linear systems consist of a limited finite amount of components where it is possible to know and itemize each element in the system, making it possible to define a closed system and say what it part of the organization and what is not, with complex systems we typically can't do this, and this makes them open systems, where we never have full knowledge or understanding of all the parts and all the interactions, with the internet or financial markets being a good example.

**2. Interdependency**

Secondly interdependence, linear systems have a limited amount of elements interacting in a well defined linear fashion meaning cause and effect are directly related, if I hit a ball with a bat it will move off in the opposite direction that is linear causality. It is very simple and intuitive to us, we are programmed to look for and try and understand the world through simple cause and effect interactions and this works well when dealing with simple systems. But as we turn up the interdependency between the parts this linear causality starts to break down.

Interdependence means the way we put things together and what we put together matter. Like putting two chemicals together, depending on which ones they are we may get a very different outcome, they may work together giving us an outcome much greater than we expected or have no effect on each other at all. Coupled with this, events may be interdependent over time feeding back on themselves to have a compounding effect over time, like compound interest, the result can be exponential growth or decay as things change very rapidly, with these feedback loops small events can get amplified into large systemic effects and this is part of the idea of the butterfly effect and chaos.

**3. Connectivity**

Next the degree of connectivity, complex systems are known to be highly interconnected this is why they are typically modeled as networks, that capture this connectivity. Linear systems have a low level of interconnectivity between their parts and thus we define them in terms of these isolated parts and their properties. In these highly interconnected systems such as the internet or the global air transportation system, it is the structure of the network that comes to define the system, that is to say, what is connected to what and where you lie in the network, are you a central hub like London in the financial markets or on the periphery? what is flowing on the network how evenly are things distributed out and many other questions relating to the structure of the connections. Connectivity and access are central to understanding complex systems and network theory is the language through which we do that.

**4. Autonomy**

Lastly, complexity is a product of the degree of autonomy and capacity for adaptation of the elements within the organization, a corollary to this is diversity. When all the elements within our system are very similar or homogeneous then it is much simpler to model, design or manage, as opposed to dealing with a heterogeneous organization composed of many diverse parts, each with their own unique set of properties. When the elements have a very low level of autonomy and diversity, then the system can be designed, managed and controlled centrally in a top-down fashion. But as we increase the autonomy of the elements within the system this becomes no longer possible as control and organization become distributed out, and it is the interactions on the local level that come to define how the system develops.

This gives rise to another important feature of complex systems, that is self-organization. When elements have the autonomy to adapt locally, they can self-organize to form global patterns of organization. The process through which this takes place is called emergence. Thus, as opposed to simple linear systems where order typically comes from some form of top-down, centralized coordination, patterns of order within complex systems emerge in a distributed fashion from the bottom up.

**Systems Thinking**
**Management**

**Overview**

If we are going to manage anything we are going to have to have some representation or model of how it works. A paradigm is the fundamental conceptual framework or model we use for interpreting events. In science there are just two different paradigms or processes of reasoning, these two different approaches to modeling are called analysis and synthesis. Analysis is the standard process of reasoning used within mainstream science, management, and engineering, while synthesis is typically seen as an alternative and it forms the foundations to what we call systems thinking.

With the process of analysis, we build a model of something by focusing on that system, decomposing it to understand its constituent parts, the simple interactions between those elements and then we form an account of the whole in terms of these parts, the process of doing this is called reductionism, because we are reducing the system to its most elementary parts. This is the standard approach taken by modern science and it is why when we think of science we think of things like atoms, molecules and people in labs that isolate things and take them apart to understand their properties in isolation.

Synthesis, in contrast to analysis, is the process of reasoning whereby we try to understand something not by taking it apart but instead we try to look at the system in relation to its environment, so here we are reasoning upwards instead of downwards, we build up a model of the system by understanding its connections to other things within its environment and looking at the function or role that it plays within that network of connections, that make up the context or environment. For example, instead of trying to understand something like a bird by taking it into the lab and dissecting it to understand its anatomy, here we would instead go out and look at the bird within its native environment, trying to understand its place and function within that ecosystem as a whole. Where as analysis is characterized by the approach of reductionism, synthesis is characterized as being holistic, we are always referring to the whole context or environment in order to create a model of the system we are interested in.

"Systems thinking is a discipline for seeing wholes. It is a framework for seeing interrelationships rather than things, for seeing patterns of change rather than static “snapshots.” It is a set of general principles — distilled over the course of the twentieth century, spanning fields as diverse as the physical and social sciences, engineering, and management....During the last thirty years, these tools have been applied to understand a wide range of corporate, urban, regional, economic, political, ecological, and even psychological systems. And systems thinking is a sensibility — for the subtle interconnectedness that gives living systems their unique character" - Peter Senge, in The Fifth Discipline

**Synthesis & Analysis**

Both synthesis and analysis are equally valid processes of reasoning, we use them both all day every day. When we go to buy a car we think about the properties of that car in isolation, its fuel consumption, the quality of its tires, the interior, etc. but we also think about how well it will be suited to the context within which it will be used, will we be driving it in the city or country, does my wife have a similar car or not etc. In order to properly build up a model of something we really need to use both processes of reasoning.

We typically call synthesis and systems thinking an alternative approach because the modern era has been characterized by a dominance of the analytical scientific approach. For approximately the past 5 hundred years since the scientific revolution and the work of Galileo and Newton and others, the reductionist approach has been the mainstream approach to modeling and interpreting our world. As such it has formed the backbone of modern society's collective body of knowledge and during the industrial revolution, this body of scientific knowledge was applied to creating a more formal management approach, what we call scientific management. The industrial revolution and the arrival of mass society necessitated a whole new approach to management as it became increasingly professionalized and specialized in response to having to deal with larger and more complicated forms of organization such as the modern nation state and large corporations.

Scientific management was an early management theory to come out of this period and gained widespread acceptance in analyzing and improving business organization and the workflows in factories. Scientific management is based on the work of Frederick Taylor who laid down the fundamental principles of large-scale manufacturing through the assembly line. It emphasizes rationalization and standardization of work through the division of labor. Frederick Taylor looked at each step of production – breaking those steps into sub-steps – and recorded exactly how much time and how much motion was necessary to complete each task. By reducing the amount of motion the worker could get more done and productivity was increased. It was an idea that fitted perfectly with industrial age mechanization.

**Reductionism**

This approach to managing organizations that were born out of the Industrial Age has gone on to be applied to all areas of organization and it remains the default approach that we inherit today. So we will quickly give an outline to some of it primary characteristics; some of its advantages and limitations.

Firstly reductionism breaks systems down into their individual parts and focuses on these well-defined components, so within management this involves the dividing of an organization or process into categories, departments or stages. By doing this we create component parts that can be easily isolated and measured.

By breaking a process up in this way we are also able to isolate the organization’s components sufficiently to identify simple linear interactions of cause and effect. We can then use these simple cause and effect interactions to influence or control how the components function. We can measure its efficiency and control its output by manipulating its input. By using this method we can divide up a complex system like a large corporation into simple components that can be measured, controlled and thus managed.

This breaking down of the system into individual components then inevitably requires, at some stage, for us to put all the parts back together so as to achieve the end product or result. In order to achieve this, traditional organizations build a hierarchical pyramid, right at the top of which is one or a small group of elements that are responsible for integrating the whole system. Below this is a small set of positions responsible for managing and integrating the primary domains of the organization and farther down more people are responsible for more specialized areas and so on until we get to the front lines of the organization. Each level is responsible for the integration of the different set of functions beneath it. In this way, the organization can be coordinated from one centralized position. All components can be controlled through a direct line of command and measured through a defined set of metrics relevant to their domain.

"94% of problems in a business are systems driven and only 6% are people driven" - W. Edward Deming

**Limitations**

This model of the industrial organization was developed in response to a particular environment that required the large-scale, mass production of standardized products and services, in a stable and predictable fashion. Within this context, the industrial model for organizations has, in many ways, proven itself highly successful. But faced with the changing environment of the 21st century, its limitations are becoming increasingly clear to us.

Complexity management is based upon this alternative paradigm of synthesis that gives us a very different model to organizations and how to manage them. Being holistic it is focused on the whole instead of the parts, it is primarily focused on the whole functionality of the organization, positing that this is an emergent phenomenon, that is to say, that the whole organization is something more than the sum of its parts. From this perspective, it is the particular way in which the parts interact that gives rise to this added value, the emergent global functionality and it is this emergent functionality that we are really interested in. Thus we are not particularly interested in any parts of the organization but instead how those parts are arranged or organized into a functional unit.

Instead of focusing on the components of the organization we focus instead on the connections, that is to say, we do not try to achieve the desired outcome by defining component parts and trying to control those parts through a hierarchy, we instead create the connections, the context within which those components interact and out of that we get the emergence of global functionality to the organization that we desire.

So these are two very different approaches, with the standard approach we are essentially trying to manage and control the output to the system, within this approach management defines and specifies to the organization what they want the outcome to be, this is why it is seen to be top-down in nature because management is constraining the elements of the organization towards some desired outcome.

In contrary the complexity approach does not seek to control or even define the desired output to the system, instead, it is focused on creating the right input conditions that will enable the elements in the organization to self-organize into a functional unit out of which emerges the desired global outcome to the organization. This approach is essentially a creative one, your capacity as a manager to influence the system in only in your capacity to create the input context you don't get to control the system. Emergence is fundamentally a process of creation, leading or managing an organization within this paradigm means creating the context.

**System Dynamics**
**An Overview**

**Overview**

The emphasis within the systems and complexity paradigm is on local interactions and how this gives rise to the emergent macro-level phenomenon of the state to the whole organization. System dynamics is one modeling language from systems theory that is used in the management of large complex systems in order to try and capture these local causal links and how their interactions over time give rise to long-term patterns of behavior. System dynamics is a methodology and mathematical modeling technique to frame, understand, and discuss complex issues and problems. Originally developed in the 1950s to help managers improve their understanding of industrial processes, it is now being used throughout the public and private sector for dealing with large complex projects, such as for macroeconomic analysis, military interventions or environmental policy modeling.

System dynamics is a holistic approach in nature. In our analysis, we often focus on discrete events, like watching the news every night where the presenter simply describes what happened. But of course, if we really want to understand something like why a dictatorship fell or the price of biogas is going up or why a large organization like Nokia was incapable of responding to the changing market, we can't simply do this by describing what happens. We need to understand the dynamics behind these events; what is really driving the system. And this is what systems thinking is about, trying to get behind events to see what is truly causing them.

**Systems Behavior**

All of these complex organizations that we see have a typical behavior, we see recurring patterns, like with the example of Nokia failing to innovate and adapt, we see this with many large organizations that are incapable of adapting to changes and the eventually get disrupted, these typical recurring behaviors within a system are called system archetypes.

System archetypes are reoccurring patterns of behavior within a system. We see a child playing away happily and then some small event happens and they start crying, the first time we see this happen we would think that it was the small event that caused the child to cry, but if we were the child's parent and saw this pattern of behavior happening time after time, we would start to realize that in fact, it is not so much the event itself but some underlying dynamic that is creating this behavior.

Thus systems exhibit certain behavior but under this is deep system structure a set of underlying dynamics that are really driving the system and it is these drivers that system dynamics tries to capture. In large complex systems it is these dynamics that hold the system within a certain configuration or state, therefore it is necessary to understand these dynamics before we can try and effect the system, if we don't understand the underlying dynamics we will likely get unintended consequences or no effect at all.

For example, we can think about the Iraq war, the Iraq invasion was a direct intervention into a very complex system, that of the whole social, cultural and political system of a nation to which the invaders had very little understanding of the dynamics. By altering those dynamics that had held the system in its previous state it essentially went out of control and eventually collapsed into chaos. sufficed to say, you can't really manage a system until you understand its dynamics and by understanding those dynamics you can find the leverage points that enable effective changes in that system.

**Interdependency**

The basic idea of systems thinking is that of interdependence, for many people this is what defines the idea of a system the fact that the parts are interdependent, therefore every action within the organization is seen to trigger a reaction. In system dynamics, this reaction is called feedback. In these highly interconnected systems nothing exists in a vacuum, every action feeds back to its source over time. The fuel exhaust coming out of your car engine may look like it simply disappears having no effect, but that is just because you are isolating one component in a much larger system. of course, sooner or later all that exhaust feeds back to affect all of us drivers. And that is the nature of managing complex systems you have to look at the whole in order to see these feedback loops that are driving it.

Feedback loops describe a state of interdependence between two or more elements within a system and there are just two types of feedback, positive feedback which is a self-reinforcing loop and negative feedback which is a balancing loop.

**Positive Feedback**
More +
More +
More +

**Negative Feedback**
More +
Less -

**Balance & Imbalance**

Reinforcing feedback (or amplifying feedback) accelerates the given trend of a process. If the trend is ascending, the reinforcing (positive) feedback will accelerate the growth. If the trend is descending, it will accelerate the decline. For example, the falling of an avalanche is a self-reinforcing feedback process, the more material that falls the more momentum it adds to the avalanche thus dislodging more material which feeds back to create greater momentum and so on.

Another example might be minority group prejudice within a society. Prejudice tends to generate discrimination against the minority which tends to limit their opportunities which feeds into limit their achievements which in turn feeds back to validate the majority that the minority are not as good at them, thus once again reinforcing the chain of events. This downward spiral that may be caused by a self-reinforcing feedback loop is called a vicious cycle. But we can also have virtuous cycles, for example having a good reputation as an organization means others will talk about you favorably which will feedback to motivate your organization to live up to that expectation and excel, which again will affect people's perception favorably and so on.

Balancing feedback, or stabilizing feedback, involves two or more elements that are counterbalancing each other, if we get more of one this creates less of another which feeds back to reduce the first. For example, the market mechanism that balances supply and demand is a negative feedback loop. If supply goes up the price goes down which promotes more buying which feeds back to reduce the stock thus bring it back to a balanced equilibrium. Maintaining your balance while riding a bicycle is an example of a negative feedback loop, the more you move off in one direction the strong you react by pulling yourself back on course. Thus we can see how negative feedback works as a control system to maintain and regulate the organization within a set of desired parameters.

Whereas positive feedback tends to lead to instability via exponential growth, oscillation or chaotic behavior, negative feedback generally promotes stability. Negative feedback tends to promote a settling to equilibrium and reduces the effects of perturbations. Negative feedback loops in which just the right amount of correction is applied with optimum timing can be very stable, accurate, and responsive.

**Dynamics**

These feedback loops then create a certain reoccurring pattern to the system as it changes over time. For example most feedback does not occur instantly, especially when we are dealing with a large organization, there is instead a time delay, so if we have a system dominated by negative feedback with time delay we get an oscillatory pattern over time as we have one effect that takes it in one direction before the counterbalancing feedback gradually dampens it down and brings it back in the other direction. We might see this dynamic in countercyclical fiscal policy by a government as it tries to counterbalance the business cycle.

Inversely positive reinforcing feedback loops create a dynamic of rapid exponential growth or decay, that often leads to collapse when some maximum level is reached. The so-called tragedy of the commons may be an example of this archetype. Agents use the common limited resource to profit individually. As the use of the resource is not controlled, the agents would like to continuously raise their personal benefits. The resource is therefore used more and more and the revenue to the agents starts to decrease as the overall resource becomes depleted. The more an actor sees others over-exploiting the resource the more they are likely to intensify their activity knowing that it will be gone soon. The agents intensify their exploitation until the resource is completely used up or seriously damaged leading to collapse and a real instance of this can be seen in overfishing.

"The fact that we collectively create results that nobody wants, in almost any kind of system today, how can we make sense of that" - Otto Scharmer, MIT

**Leverage Points**

By understanding these dynamics that hold the system in a particular configuration or generate a particular behavior over time, we can begin to identify points within the linkage of effects that might alter its behavior towards the desirable outcome. Traditionally we focus on changing things by changing the components in the system, if a company is doing badly we fire the CEO, but this is the lowest point of leverage, by understanding the dynamics we can see that it is not really the members of the organization that is creating systemic failure. It is the system itself, the way it is arranged that creates systemic failures. If you are in systemic political deadlock electing a new president is unlikely to change much, because you are simply placing a component in a broader system that is setup to create the same behavior again.

It is only at this systems level that you have the opportunity to really change things through leverage points, these “leverage points” are places within a complex system, such as a corporation, an economy, a city, or an ecosystem, where a small shift in one thing can produce big changes in everything. The founder of system dynamics talked about complex systems as being counterintuitive and leverage points being likewise. In our traditional approach we focus on the component parts to an organization we think it is the president of a country that has the greatest leverage. In fact, the component parts are the lowest point of leverage within the system, the higher points of leverage are in changing the connections within the organization, changing the flow of information and most of all changing the model that the organization uses to interpret that information.

For example, let's think about trying to get people to smoke less, well we can try to directly affect them by increasing the cost of cigarettes, but also we can indirectly influence them by altering the feedback loops. Most people who smoke try to ignore or downplay the negative effect it is having on their body, simply hoping that they don't get cancer. This is an open loop system with negative externalities, they are consuming the cigaret and shifting the negative effects away by denying them in some way. Now when it comes to managing this system instead of focusing on the parts, we try to alter this feedback loop, we place a big graphic image or sign on the face of the pack that connects them with the consequences of their actions every time they smoke, thus trying to close the feedback loop to reduce their consumption.

**Events**
What is happening?

**Trends**
What trends are there over time?

**Structure**
How are the patterns related?

**Models**
What values + beliefs shape the system?

As another example of a counterintuitive leverage point, we could cite a recent piece of research done analyzing the social network of a company in Hungary. The analysis showed that the network had one dominant node in it which had a much higher level of connectivity than all of the senior executives, but this node was not the CEO, in fact, it was an external health practitioner who during his job got to travel around the different departments and make contact with almost all the employees, thus serving as an important point of information exchange within the organization.

But ultimately the highest leverage point in any organization is in changing the model that they use to interpret events, changing the paradigm can change the whole organization's understanding of itself and its function, which can ultimately result in a complete transformation. As an example, we can think about the rise of the paradigm of sustainability over the past few decades. Before this change in paradigm talking about the environment, trying to conserve nature, or effect any positive environment impact was largely a lost cause, environmental concerns were marginalized and generally bulldozed by economic interests.

But given this paradigm shift, we now see sustainability moving to central stage as it becomes part of what organizations are and do, sustainability is now starting to be seen as part of the marketing, value proposition and competitive advantage of many organizations. This change in paradigm is then generating real outcomes that work and change the overall macro-state to this complex organization. As the saying goes there is nothing as practical as a good theory, and the paradigms and models an organization uses are by far the highest leverage point for effecting the overall state of the organization.

**Emergence**
**Managing the evolutionary potential**

**Overview**

Our whole conception of organization and the profession of management is built around the idea of a hierarchy within organizations through which control is exercised in a downward fashion in order to coordinate the individual's activities towards some desired outcome. This approach may work well within relatively simple environments, after all, this form of management has created the industrial economies we live in today, but unfortunately it is not designed for more complex environments. We will firstly briefly outline some of the limitations to this standard approach to management.

Firstly, Reductionism focuses on the static components of an organization and the metrics we apply to valuing them. In so doing, it systematically diminishes the space around and between them that is not measured. Thus, the system can become reduced to a simple set of metrics that are depleting some resource that may be more difficult to quantify, but is equally required to maintain the system in the long term. A good example of this is the failure of our metrics for economic growth to incorporate the natural resources it depends upon. The net result of this is a short-term profit at a long-term expense making the system unsustainable.

Secondly, inherent in the command and control paradigm is the idea that a person or few people in charge give the solution, that is the only solution, to other people, who are in charge of implementing it. Thus the organization is heavily dependent upon the limited cognitive and information processing capabilities of a few individuals at the top of the hierarchy. This also reduces the capacity for the majority of the organization’s members to take initiative, act autonomously and respond to local level information.

Lastly, the reductionist model to organization is built on the axiom of a relatively static system in a relatively static environment. The primary focus of this form of management is to remove surprise, to dampen down change and keep an organization moving stably through time according to the prior intentions of its members. All of these features mean that these systems are invariantly resistant to change, innovation and evolution, and thus, inept at dealing with dynamic and volatile environments.

"In a complex adaptive system you can’t predict or determine the future you have to manage in the present" - David Snowden Cognitive Edge

**Emergence**

The standard approach is a linear model, it gives us exactly what we expect, by constraining the members we reduce their autonomous engagement, the result is inevitably that we get business as usual, we are very unlikely to get exceptional results because the members are not fully engaged. This model is well suited to normal circumstances but it is not designed for dealing with exceptional circumstances.

Emergence Is the process whereby new phenomena are created as we combine things together. Our global economy is a good example of emergence, through all of the systems of organization we can collectively produce things like airplanes and laptop computers that none of us could produce if we all acted independently, these things are emergent phenomena of the way the parts are arranged. And this is part of Adam Smith's insight that even though all of the members of a society may be acting in their own self-interest we can still get globally beneficial outcomes.

We can also call this unintended consequences, for example, an arms race might be an example of an emergent unintended consequence, neither actor in the dynamic may have wanted to end up in the arms race but it was the way that their individual actions interacted that created that overall eventuality. As we will be discussing some of the most difficult and intractable problems in our world are unintended emergent consequences, such as inequality, nobody really wants to live in a society with very high inequality, but at the same time, we as individuals still go on pursuing activities that lead to this emergent macro-scale phenomena. We can see from this that emergent phenomena are not always positive results, it depends on the type of interaction between the elements in the organizations, and we call these types of interaction synergies; the idea of synergies is a central concept in systems theory.

"The typical solutions that we have seen in society right now... are a lot of object oriented responses which really focus on one piece of the pie, say look at energy optimization or material optimization and try to deal with that in a limited context… focusing on one aspect of a problem instead of taking a systemic perspective can often have these very unintended consequences" - Eva Gladek Industrial Ecologist

**Synergy**

A synergy is an interaction between two or more things that combine to create an effect that is different in some way from the two combined effects acting in isolation. Synergies can be both positive and negative, a negative synergy is a form of interference or what we might call a negative externality, where two things are working in a counteractive fashion to reduce the effect of each other, thus making the combined outcome less than the sum of its parts, noise pollution might be an example of this, two people talking at the same time don't make the conversation twice as good.

We get the emergence of an effective organization through positive synergies, which involves people differentiating their activities while also coordinating them within some combined process. And this is the essence of a functional complex organization, they manage to differentiate and coordinate many parts and out of that we get powerful emergence, that makes the whole truly different from its parts, like a swarm of bees or ant colony both of which are vastly more sophisticated than the simple component parts that make them up. From the complexity perspective management of an organization is really about creating a context within which we can get these positive synergies to happen and we do that by creating an attractor towards behavior that has positive externalities.

For example if we think about the failures of our healthcare systems, now no one wants to get obese and no one wants to have to spend 10% of their country's GDP on healthcare, this is in many ways an emergent phenomena of micro level negative externalities of people eating unhealthy food, lack of exercise, etc.

Now if we want to try and change this outcome we don't go into the top management and declare some new regulation. Instead, we look at the context within which the members of the organization are acting and how, because of the local incentives they are under, we get this emergent dysfunctional global outcome. We ask how can we make choosing the salad an easier option than choosing the Big Mac and fries, or how if we create more greenways that might incentives people to walk more instead of taking their car. These are examples of attractors, that are specifically designed to create a context within which choosing an action that has a positive externality is simply easier and more attractive than choosing one that has a negative externality, and in this way, we get synergies and the emergence of the desired outcome on the macro level.

**Obliquity**

Whereas simple systems are nothing more than the sum of their parts, all complex forms of organization have two or more qualitatively different levels of organization to them, the micro level is qualitatively different from the macro level and with complexity management we don't try to directly affect the macro level, we try to alter it by effect the local context within which the actors in the system make their choices.

And this helps to illustrate another important idea within complexity management, that of obliquity. Obliquity means not explicit or directly to the desired point. For example in trying to land a rocket on the moon one does not project the rocket directly at the moon, one would direct it slightly off from the most direct line and let the gravity of the moon catch it and bring it into the desired final point.

Because complex systems are nonlinear, meaning there is no direct cause and effect, the outcomes to the system are an emergent phenomenon we can not directly affect them, but instead we have to aim around the phenomena that we wish to effect, we have to instead focus on the component's interactions that are giving rise to this emergent outcome, that is to say, we have to take an oblique approach to solving the problem.

Mark Anderson a previous manager at Trader Joe's illustrates this phenomena well when he writes, quote, "one of the key things I took away from my experience as a store manager with Trader Joe's was just how much the "bottom line" of making money was enhanced when you focus on treating employees and customers well. At the end of the day, Trader Joe's makes a lot of money. But they do so not by focusing on making as much money as they can, but rather by seeking to provide the best service and products possible." He goes on to write "Though I haven't termed it "obliquity" until now, I've advocated a similar focus for public schools. Rather than focus on the "bottom line" of student test scores, we need to focus on the content taught and the learning environment of the school. And by focusing on those things, test scores will naturally be enhanced." we can see clearly the idea of emergence here, instead of focusing on the direct outcome he is talking about using an oblique method of creating the context for these desired outcomes to emerge.

Efforts to impose linear thinking on complex situations have often led to the opposite of what was intended. Where explicit articulation of a goal will result in the complex environment pushing back in the opposite direction, as a result, the principle of obliquity becomes relevant. Oblique goals will often be more effective, for example, the goal of delighting customers may make more money than an explicit direct goal of simply trying to make money. A classical example of this is happiness, we all wish to have some happiness and quality of life, but if we focus too much directly on this outcome it often, in the long run, leads to the opposite results. Quality of life is again a complex emergent phenomena it is not something that can be achieved directly.

**Open Platform Organizations**

**Overview**

Complex systems are fundamentally open systems, that is to say, that they have such a high level of connection and exchange with their environment that we can no longer define and manage them in terms of a well-defined boundary, where things are either a part of the organization or not. This is of course how we traditionally think of organizations, as being fixed, relatively static and well bounded, like a football team we can say exactly who is part of the organization and who is not and everyone typically has a fixed well defined role within that organization, like a government that ascribes positions to each of its members in its different departments.

Now think of a metropolitan area, metro areas are complex organizations, they have no well-defined boundaries. They are open systems, people, goods and services are continuously flowing in and out, what makes this an organization at all is not the boundary condition but instead the dense network of interactions and interdependence, everyone is interconnected and interdependent in effecting the overall state to the system.

Complex organizations are dynamic networks, people join and leave as they need, think about Facebook's social network or people sharing files on the internet, it happens in a swarm-like fashion with people coupling and decoupling from the organization in a dynamic fashion. In these open organizations we do not have control over the components in the system, like international political organizations, they don't get to tell countries what to do, the capacity to act and make decisions resides on the local level, but members of this kind of organization have come together because they perceive their joint interdependence in effecting some outcome that none can achieve in isolation. An example might be countries coming together to try and solve climate change.

Thus the emphasis is on attracting the members into the organization and creating the conditions that will result in coordination. These organizations may have a centralized component to them that helps to facilitate the organization, if we think about an organization like the OECD or the Linux foundation both have a centralized component that works as a facilitator, coordinating between members, but the vast majority of members are not part of this formal organization they are autonomous and only partly associated with it.

“While, platforms have traditionally been associated with industries like e-commerce and mobile payments… energy, health-care and the public sector are ripe for innovation. The platform enterprise will be a fascinating space of business to watch in the coming years” - Peter C. Evans CGE

**Platforms**

It is only really in the past decade or two that we have seen the true rise and coherent formalization of this open model to organizations and it is now called a platform organization. The term platform has become very popular over the past decade or so, every second business coming out of Silicon Valley is calling themselves a platform now, and this is not surprising because the platform model has proven highly successful. Many of the superstar businesses that have shot to the top of market capitalization like Google, Amazon, and Apple are essentially platform organizations.

A platform is something that supports something else, a platform organization is then an organization that supports the interaction or exchange between two or more other parties. So here we can already see the difference between the closed form of organization that sits above the members organizing them and this open organization on which the members are supported. A classical example of this platform model would be Uber the car sharing company that operates as the supporting platform for connecting people with cars to people who need mobility.

In economics, this is called a two-sided market, where the central role of the platform is in connecting different parties together and facilitating exchange. Multi-sided platforms exist because there is a need for an intermediary in order to match both parties on the platform in an efficient way. Indeed, this intermediary will minimize the overall cost, for instance, by avoiding duplication, or by minimizing transaction costs. This intermediary will make possible exchanges that would not occur without them and create value for both sides. Platforms, by playing an intermediary role, produce certain value for both parties that are interconnected through it, and therefore those sides may both be seen as customers of the platform, unlike in the traditional seller-buyer dichotomy.

These open platforms typically do not employ or really have much control over the users of the system, they simply provide the enabling context for the exchange to take place. The platform typically provides the tools and protocols through which members interact, there are typically low barriers to entry or no barriers at all, it is an open organization people can join or leave when they want.

Open platform organizations have been around for a long time, more traditional examples would include credit card providers like Visa, that facility the interaction between cardholders and merchants, another example would be job recruitment agencies or accommodation agencies.

The current rise of platforms is largely due to the reduction in interaction costs that makes it vastly easier to set them up, and gain participants due to the arrival of the ultimate open platform of our age, the internet. Thus many of these new open systems of organization are based on the internet, but that is not to say they stay on the internet. The first in this wave of new platform organizations were fully internet based, like Napster, social networks, Wikipedia etc. But increasingly we see open IT-enabled platforms that organize significant amounts of physical assets, such as Airbnb, being the largest accommodation service in the world, or Uber being the largest taxi service, and increasingly these open platform organizations are affecting all industries, such as new platforms built on smart power grid technology, materials exchange platforms or food platforms.

"A Platform organization uses its available resources to find, connect and support those who share its purpose"

**Characteristics**

This open platform model has a number of advantages over closed forms of organization. Firstly they are highly scalable, rather than becoming unwieldy with greater numbers of participants, they become only more capable and valuable. With closed systems of organization the larger you scale them the more levels of bureaucracy you need to maintain and the farther removed the centralized authority becomes from the actual operations of the organization. Large centralized, closed organizations of this kind can thus become very cumbersome. In contrary platforms are designed for scale, because they do not deliver the end product or service themselves they can maintain a very limited amount of assets even when they scale, for example, some online platforms have reached a million users with only a handful of employees and a small budget. Platforms have the capacity to scale to a truly global level with Facebook's over one and a half billion users being a good example.

Platform organizations are typically built on the long tail, they leverage the reduction in transaction costs that Information technology has enabled to tap into the vast amount of unused resources of the end user that were previously not accessible within the centralized model because of high coordination costs. In such a way networked platform organizations have the capacity to create new markets and tap into underutilized resources and capabilities. They aggregate a large number of small and often non-professional resources, providing a unified interface for the end user to access them. In such a way they are able to bypass traditional centralized incumbents creating whole new value streams out of underutilized resources, such as available car space or available accommodation space or excess food.

In the past, sellers have been limited by the economics of production and distribution to a “push-based approach,” meaning that they simply made an efficiently large batch size of their product and hoisted it onto the marketplace. This means a number of things, that they needed significant capital expenditure up front, that they had to leverage economies of scale to be able to compete and then they had to convince customers to buy in mass or else they would not be able to get the unit price low enough.

Platforms avoid most of this which makes them much more agile organizations. Often the product being sold already exists, all that the platform is creating is the connections to enable exchange thus there are limited overhead costs, no great need for forecast planning and products can be sold in small units, that can enable a more personalized experience, which is difficult to achieve within a centralized model setup for batch processing.

Finally, platforms often work to enable the exchange of new value forms, such as social capital, natural capital or cultural capital. Our traditional business organization really just sold products and tried to make money. Although many of these platforms are strongly commercially oriented, because they are connecting people to people they often have a strong social dimension, they often enable more than just commercial transactions, but also build in social capabilities that add extra value to the system. The bureaucratic organization is designed to be impersonal, one size fits all, and this has many advantages but it largely excludes or ignores the value of social capital. These platforms have the technology and capabilities to easily include and enable the exchange of social capital, that adds an extra dimension to them often making them more engaging.

With the rise of information technology open IT platforms are becoming a standard approach for managing complex organizations that are more like ecosystems than the traditional industrial age closed mechanical form of organization we are used to. These platforms are really two-sided markets that work to facilitate the exchange of value, accessing whole new value sources by creating a more complex form of user generated organization.

**Network Organizations**

**Overview**

The rise of networks and hyperconnectivity is one of the most radical and powerful forces shaping our world today. The advent of information technology and the internet has resulted in a massive reduction in collaboration costs, and the possibility for people to set up their own networks of collaboration, giving presence to a mass of new networked organizations as they increasingly become the organizational structure of post-industrial economies.

This new economy, driven by connectivity is very different to the industrial age economy. Instead of being about the familiar products and ownership paradigm that we are so used to, it is about services and access. This is the so-called access economy also called the services economy or sharing economy. The access economy is a business model where goods and services are traded on the basis of access rather than ownership: it refers to renting things temporarily rather than selling them permanently. As one person describes it - "The access economy is what emerges when access to (x) becomes cheap, satisfactory, convenient and reliable enough that the premium on ownership of (x) disappears."

So instead of owning your music on CDs you have access to a music service that streams them, or instead of owning movies you have access to them on demand via an online streaming service. Instead of owning a car you have access to transportation via a car sharing service. And the list goes on ever expanding as new businesses emerge with new access based services to disrupt the existing product based incumbents.

This model uses a technology platform, often accessed via a mobile device, to connect suppliers willing to rent assets, for example, apartments for rent or cars for transportation, with end users. This may reduce the need for intermediaries - for example, centrally organized businesses such as taxi companies - between the supplier and consumer. Such platforms may also be used to connect employers and workers for employment opportunities, bypassing traditional employment service firms and traditional fixed employer-employee relationships.

"Hyperconnectivity is the increasing digital interconnection of people – and things – anytime and anywhere. By 2020 there will be 50 billion networked devices. This level of connectivity will have profound social, political and economic consequences, and increasingly form part of our everyday lives, from the cars we drive and medicines we take, to the jobs we do and the governance systems we live in" - World Economic Forum

**Organization Structure**

This wave of connectivity is having an effect on all organizations, as we see production processes, business processes and organizations get unbundled from their traditional monolithic form and distributed out into networks. The classical example of this is on-demand staffing services, websites like Freelancer or Upwork, where people offer their skills in all forms of activity from accounting, to graphic design, to business consulting and you can create an organization, on demand, hiring on a project basis. Creating a very dynamic organization that can expand to meet capacity as employees join and leave the organization in a fluid fashion, making employees available to join multiple networks at the same time or over time. Thus employees become micro-entrepreneurs broadcasting their availability and organizations become networks for aggregating them in response to demand, which is a much more agile form of organization relative to our traditional model.

This reduction in transaction cost has also enabled us to create new forms of organization that can harness the efforts of those at a much lower level of productivity than was previously possible. Traditional formal organizations with high overhead costs could only operate by ensuring their members achieved a certain level of productivity or professionalism, and this is part of what made them closed organizations. But when we reduce the transaction costs so low, then it becomes viable to create open organizations, where anyone that is able to contribute anything is of value and by getting enough people contributing only a small amount, we can create a large organization on the long tail, the mass of non-professionals that were previously not productive enough to be hired by formal organizations, can now become prosumers, both producing and consuming.

If we step out of our traditional paradigm surrounding work and formal organizations and look outside the box, we will see quite quickly that we only utilize a small fraction of the actual resources available to us. We assume that formal organizations are the only effective means for value generation, so we use them to generate value either in the public or private sector, they are the systems that manage the various production processes within our society and we assume, tacitly that anyone that is not part of a formal organization is a passive consumer or amateur, capable of only substandard production, it is a simple linear model that creates a dichotomy where formal organizations push-out end products to passive recipients, you are either a professional producer or a consumer.

"At all levels, local, regional, national and global we have created formal and quite rigid hierarchies for governance that pacifies us, we have become pieces not players, a few people play but the vast majority that can really make a difference are sitting on the benches watching the drama play out through the media... we don't feel like we participate, a lot of people are sitting inside of hierarchies focusing on their tiny part and then they go home, fall asleep, get up in the morning and do it all over again. Our strong talent and desire to contribute do not have a proper arena at work, we are not using the possibilities inside of our organizations"

Within many organizations we have a dynamic where a few people have a vision as to how that organization should be and then we have many people who are disenfranchised, simply executing on that vision, like cogs in a machine. The result can be a semi-zombie organization, where very few people are in any way aware or responsible for what is going on, while a very many are simply executing in a mechanical fashion the directions they are given. And this is a precarious and potentially dangerous situation, when people become disenfranchised and resort to simply acting out procedures, the organization in this mode is essentially sleepwalking, people are deferring their responsibility to the centralized organization but there are only a handful of people actually responsible within that organization. And if this is a large organization it is not possible for them to be aware of everything that is going on throughout the entire organization.

Much of this traditional centralized organizational structure creates disenfranchisement, this centralized model means empowerment is concentrated within some centralized authority, which creates disengagement for the mass of members. And this is the same on the macro level of the whole of a society or economy, a few centralized organizations such as governments and corporations, have a vision about how their domain should be and they produce products and services that are pushed out to the vast majority of society.

This centralized model of course fails to capture or harness a vast amount of latent potential within society. That is the latent potential of people taking responsibility for their own lives and becoming engaged with the products they use and the maintenance of their environment. This is a vast new source of untapped potential value that we are just beginning to discover, through user generated content, co-creation, citizen engagement and so on. But formal organizations can only really tap into this by giving up the linear model, the idea that they have the right answer, they know what the consumer wants and they just have to give it to them. For example, this was essentially the model of the media industry until very recently. After many decades of producing blockbuster films and pop music they thought they have the model perfected, producing big budget perfectly finished productions and pushing them out to passive end users, and as long as we stay within this linear paradigm it seems impossible to conceive of the end user wanting anything else. But of course along came the internet and a whole new nonlinear paradigm, it turns out what people really wanted was not just to consumer perfectly finished products, but also to connect to each other to share and create their own content. And in this, we can see this whole new value proposition of simply connecting people on the long tail. And this applies to all areas from the energy industry, to transport, to public administration etc.

On its most fundamental level connectivity is changing what people really want, from things to not only access but really context, this is what artists call the "negative space", which is the space around a sculpture, it is everything except the object itself that gives the object context and is essentially how we interpret it. The access economy is about access and when we sum up all those services we have access to, we get a context that is our quality of life. Once we have the basic material things needed for subsistence people's values shift to wanting to be connected to the things they like. What we want is to feel connected with all the things we need and care about, whether that is our family, friends, transportation, public services, a nice clean natural environment, our local neighborhood, these things form the context to our lives and our quality of life. This is what the access economy is about people recognizing that a big pile of products was not really what they wanted, and it is becoming clearer that what they really want is access to services that create the context for the quality of life that they desire. As a producer it is about networking all those products, simplifying the complex, to deliver the seamless services that users are increasingly demanding.

**Collaborative Organizations**

**Overview**

As a recent research paper on the subject of organizational collaboration notes, quote. "Collaboration does not come naturally for most employees, particularly those born before the Millennials. Previous generations were taught that competition was good, and that individual hard work—the “nose to the grindstone” mentality—would be rewarded with steady career progression. The nature of work has changed, however, and the management and knowledge silos that were created in the 20th century are no longer tenable today if organizations are to succeed. Collaboration helps break down those silos so that organizations can be creative, flexible, and ready to meet the changing, demanding needs of business today."

Interdependence is one of the key characteristics of complex systems. In simpler linear systems there is a low level of connectivity, meaning the elements can be relatively independent of each other, but as we turn up the connectivity these connections become pathways for interdependency. So although interconnectivity and interdependence are two distinctly different phenomena, interconnectivity does create interdependence. As we turn up the connectivity within the system the parts develop or evolve in relation to each other and this creates interdependencies over time.

The modern nation state might be an example of this, during the modern era different societies around the world declared their independence from each other by forming their own sovereign nation states. But today with the rise of globalization and information technology this interconnectivity is increasingly requiring us to recognize our interdependence whether this is desirable or not, interconnectivity is making interdependencies increasingly apparent, whether we are looking at the financial system, supply chains or environment concerns.

**Interdependence**

The fundamental dynamics to independence and interdependence are very different from each other. Independence creates zero sum interactions. Because the two elements states are independent one side can win while the other side loses. Like two companies competing in a market, what one side wins the other loses.

But in dynamics of interdependence, we get non-zero sum outcomes, because the state of each element is coupled with that of the other, we get either negative sum outcomes where everyone loses or we get positive sum outcomes where everyone wins. For example, with increased global interconnectivity we get the phenomena of complex interdependence. Whereby the welfare of our economies becomes dependent on that of others, meaning going to war with another nation is less of a zero-sum game where one side can win and other loses and more of a negative sum game where everyone loses because of their interdependence.

Zero-sum games create attractors towards competition because it is possible for one to get ahead by competing and winning against another. Non-zero sum games create attractors towards cooperation because everyone loses or wins together. Much of our traditional management apparatus is designed to manage organizations with a low level of connectivity where we are trying to coordinate independent members around zero-sum games. And we do this by build up a centralized hierarchy where conflict over rival goods can be easily resolved through a clear chain of command. As we turn up the connectivity and interdependency within an organization, the traditional approach of trying to coordinate relatively independent components in a top-down fashion becomes no longer necessary. Instead, we can now harness this interdependency between the members towards achieving the desired global outcomes.

**Collaboration**

This interdependency creates a very different type of organization, what we might call a collaborative organization. Collaboration should not be confused with cooperation. Cooperation is when each person on a team develops his or her own plans and shares those plans with the team. There may be joint discussion, but the focus remains on individual actions and achievement rather than on a collective strategy. Collaboration is when two or more members recognize their collective interest in achieving the same overall outcome and through this individual goals become subordinate to the collective achievement. A thing to note here is that we are not talking about the level of altruism of the members in the organization, we are assuming that stays constant. What is happening is that as you turn up the interconnectivity people come to more readily recognize the interdependence of their actions with those of others and the whole organization and from this the need to achieve an optimal global outcome in order for them to achieve their own desired results. Trying to solve climate change would again be a good example of this, no society can solve it in isolation, each society can only really achieve their desired result by the whole organization achieving an effective result.

The type of organization architecture used to coordinate the members is then relative to the level of interconnectivity and interdependence, at a low level of connectivity where zero-sum games dominate it makes sense to use a top down hierarchical model in order to resolve these conflicting interests through a strong chain of command. But as the organization evolves to become more complex it becomes more interconnected and interdependent and it is now no longer necessary or even appropriate to use this traditional model. Within these complex organizations, it is more appropriate to switch to a collaborative bottom-up organizational structure that harnesses these interdependencies to achieve optimal global outcomes.

Many traditional organizations structured through hierarchies have a strong dichotomy, with the interests of the entire enterprise only really being closely associated with those of the individuals at the top. Top management's interests may well often be closely aligned with the overall project, as their positions inherently give them a strong stake in the overall organization. But as soon as we go lower down to mid-management, operations management and the front lines where people are operating within their own departments and functional domains this connection and interdependence with the whole enterprise is quickly lost in the silos and departments. Meaning that those in the higher stator of the organization have to continuously exert authority and incentives to ensure those lower down are acting in the interests of the whole organization. But this authoritative structure that is required at a low level of connectivity is not really required when we turn up the connectivity and interdependence, in such a circumstance, through intelligent design, it can be more effective to switch to a collaborative model.

Achieving a collaborative organization means directly connecting the feedback loops and incentives of the individuals with those of the whole organization. Whereas within the reductionist approach we break complex organizations and processes into small parts and then have lots of people focus on those individual stages within different departments and develop a hierarchy of management above them in order to ensure their activity it aligned and integrated into the overall project. But breaking things down and dividing things up into small specialized units, disconnects those performing those activities from the whole enterprise, thus their activities may no longer become interdependent with others and the whole as local interests come to dominate. Creating this interdependence means directly connecting everyone's local activities to that of the overall enterprise. Placing the overall project at the center of people's activities and enabling people to see their interdependence with others in achieving their own desired results, thus fostering collaboration.

"What we can build today are open systems, systems like in a football team, you can see the whole field, you can see what every other player on your team is doing but also on the other team, imagine this on a global scale. So we can scale small group dynamics, it also means we can keep the good things we like about small groups, where we have trust with each other, we know each other" - Michel Bauwens Peer-to-Peer Foundation

As we know in small organizations this sense of collaboration is not very difficult to achieve, small traditional communities often exhibit strong social solidarity, that is expressive of the dense interactions through which they can recognize their interdependence and this drives collaboration. However in large complex organizations, this is much less easy to achieve and we see this in modern societies, particularly in large urban centers where there is a high level of inequality, in such complex systems we have not yet been able to effectively form collaborative organizations. In such circumstances, we have formal traditional organizations or nothing much at all. But information technology is changing this, by reducing the barriers to interaction, connecting people and giving them information, it is much easier for us to now create dynamic collaborative platforms at low cost capable of coordinating thousands or even millions of people, in a loosely associated fashion.

Through information technology it is much easier to directly connect people across the entire organization and directly connect their actions with the overall outcome, even in very large organizations; to recognize everyone's real contribution to the overall endeavor and make that explicit through feedback and rating systems. The best way to get employees invested in the collaborative process is to give them an opportunity to contribute to a shared vision and purpose. This is about taking the time to articulate the “why” to everyone involved in the collaborative process on a particular project or initiative. Building the values of the organization into everything that is done. Leaders must ensure that all employees understand how their work contributes to the goals of the organization and how collaboration will help them meet their goals. When employees understand their broader purpose, they can make more meaningful contributions to their team.

What we are trying to do then is change zero-sum games into positive-sum games and this is part of the systems thinking paradigm, that we don't settle for either-or solutions, where we get one thing but have to sacrifice another, in trying to look at the whole we have the possibility to find integrative synergistic solutions, not just new different ways to divide up the existing pie but actually create synergistic solutions that make the pie bigger. Instead of going and competing with others for the same resources within a market, by seeing the whole system we have the possibility to in fact create an entirely new industry, what is called a "blue ocean strategy”.

"The spirit of collaboration is penetrating every institution and all of our lives. So learning to collaborate is part of equipping yourself for effectiveness, problem solving, innovation and life-long learning in an ever changing networked economy”- Don Tapscott Author

One can see these blue ocean opportunities abound at the moment as information technology gives us new ways to connect people entirely new value propositions and markets are springing up. Such as Apple creating the iPhone that gave rise to an entirely new app industry that has come from nowhere to the fastest growing market in the US within a decade. It just goes to show that many situations will initially present themselves as zero-sum, either-or dynamics, but if we are committed to finding integrative solutions, we will invariably find a whole new dimension to the situation that has been completely bypassed, or under-utilized because it is more complex and challenging.

Creating positive sum integrative outcomes then requires us to resolve the challenges and complexity of this alternative approach, in so doing we make what was previously a more challenging course of action for the actor into an attract, the course of least resistance which becomes the default position, while also being the best outcome for the organization as a whole. And this is the essence of being a leader in a complex organization, you can't control based on the past, you have to create solutions, by creating an attractor context that integrates the micro and macro, so as to get the emergence of a future optimal global result.

For example, we see this starting to happen with alternative technologies. Whereas previously we had a strong either-or dynamic between choosing the easiest, cheapest energy source, or some environmentally friendly option. In such a case either you were part of a minority that cared about the environment and was prepared to make that extra effort in order for your activities to be in line with the best overall environmental results, or you simply took the default course that resulted in suboptimal macro outcomes. But as we have invested in the research and development of alternative energy technology and solar voltaic cells they are starting to reach grid parity, we are now moving towards a new attractor that resolves this zero-sum game and may well in the long run turn it into a positive-sum game of abundance and secure clean energy that we never possible within the previous model.

But of course this is not easy, it is the essence of leadership and real leadership is never easy, it truly takes intelligence and long term commitment to really solving problems. Leadership is not a position within an organization it is being aware of and choosing the course of action that leads to the best results for the entire organization, irrespective of what others choose to do. In any organization, there will be a disparity between the micro and macro and part of being a leader is in creating synergistic solutions that resolve that, turning it into a positive-sum outcome.

**Self-Organizing Teams**

**Overview**

Self-organization is one of the major themes within complex systems and a pervasive phenomenon in our world, complex organizations like schools of fish, ant colonies, and car traffic manage to organize themselves into emergent patterns without any form of global coordination. And this is somewhat counter intuitive to our traditional assumptions where we tend to assume that organization and order need to be imposed by some external force. But self-organization fascinates many people precisely because it is generated internally, hurricanes, consciousness, and swarms of bees are other examples of organization emerging out of the internal interaction between the component parts.

Because of the adaptive capability of humans, whenever they interact locally we invariably get some form of self-organization, thus self-organizing forms of social organization have always been there from local markets to the formation of villages and towns, but one characteristic of the modern era has been the formation of large formal organizations, like bureaucratic governments and corporations.

As we formed these larger organizations the local interaction between members across the whole organization was no longer possible in the way it was in small communities. Given the scale of the organization and the available communication tools, coordinating such large organizations was only really possible through a centralized model, a limited amount of people in the center understood and formulated plans and directions to coordinate the entire organization with information from the local level flowing into the center and directions flowing back out.

Because of economies of scale and other factors the industrial age selectivity favored these large systems of organization as being more efficient. Small self-organizing systems lived on but largely as a fringe activity as they were never able to get the scale and efficiency to compete with the centralized model as our industrialized economies became increasingly dominated by these large formal centralized organizations, which were, up until recently, seen as the only viable means for the effective production of value within society at scale.

"The leader's involvement is in the design and implementation of the structure, not managing the activity in the structure... Leadership is everywhere and nowhere at the same time. The leader's most valuable contribution once the structure begins to operate is seeking out potential limits to growth and then working to dissolve them before they have a chance to hinder the growth of the results of the structure" - Gene Bellinger Systems Thinking World

Today information technology, among other factors, is fundamentally changing this dynamic, today we have the tools and platforms for connecting people directly one-to-one or one-to-many at virtually any scale, from a small group of friends all the way up to the global level, and we can do this at very low cost, this is truly a game changer for organizational structure. The reality is that people now have very powerful tools in their hands, and this fundamentally shifts the power dynamic away from large organizations, which were very dominant until recently, towards the individual.

This is what Gartner the consulting company calls "the age of the customer" and they talk about it as such, quote "To put it simply the age of the customer is all about the shift in power between you and your customers, now that shift is away from you and towards your customer. They are empowered by digital technologies... real-time access to information.” With the access to education and information that many now have and the low barriers to connect and collaborate with others, it is now very much viable for ad hoc self-organizing systems of organization to form and compete effectively and directly with traditional centralized organizations, this is both a radical and massive shift in power. Classical examples being Wikipedia that has displaced the traditional encyclopedia or the Linux foundation that has a larger market share running web servers and smartphones than any formal business organization.

Whereas the traditional organization had relatively high overhead costs, it required an almost constant input of finance or other resources to maintain it. With the lowering of collaboration cost it is much easier to build organizations that are more agile and less dependent on significant investment of capital, and this opens the door to harnessing social value and other motives to create organizations that are less solely focused on financial outcomes but also now socially engaged, and with this we have seen the rise of the social enterprise. In developed nations, Millennials are growing up in a world of relative abundance with an almost over saturation of things, but they also inherit a world of real problems that are not so easy to ignore. And out of this mix of relative abundance, ease of collaboration and pressing real world problems we see this social enterprise arise, that harnesses the engagement of people along a number of dimensions. In short due to the context that they have grown up in millennials have a new set of expectations surrounding what work is and they are less willing to simply fit in with the traditional model. Acquiring and retaining this talent is becoming a problem for traditional organizations, as they need to develop a new mentality and a more self-organizing bottom-up structure to accommodate the new workforce.

**Process of Self-Organization**

Whereas the traditional centralized organization is a relatively static model, self-organization is a dynamic process, that requires certain conditions, most importantly it requires autonomous members densely interacting locally.

Autonomy is a very important ingredient here, self-organization always comes from the bottom-up, people have to be operating and driven by their own motives and agenda and as long as they are constrained through some central organization this can't happen. This is one reason why self-organizing systems can be more flexible and responsive, because everyone is responding locally and can act immediately to what they experience, instead of having to send the information to some centralized authority and waiting for instructions to return to act. This is part of why centralized organizations are seen as more mechanical and ridge as opposed to self-organizing systems that are more organic and fluid in nature.

The autonomy of the members to act locally is key, if we look at the process of self-organization within a flock of birds or school of fish, we get these emergent self-organizing patterns through each fish or bird operating under their own set of simple instructions to follow their local neighbors while also maintaining a certain distance from them. The important thing to note here is the if you want self-organization you have to value and respect the autonomy of the members highly, one needs to be aware that every time you impose an instruction on a member this has a very high cost in terms of reducing the self-organizing emergent capabilities of the system.

**Autonomy**
People operating under their own motives and agenda

**Interaction**
Interactions and information need to be flowing horizontally not vertically

**Attractors**
Network effect driven by positive feedback creates attractors

**Emergence**
Emergence of a global pattern of organization from local interactions

The second essential element is dense peer-to-peer interactions between the members of the organization. Interactions and information need to be flowing horizontally not vertically, one needs to create the conditions for connecting people locally. Dense interactions are important because all the members may start out with divergent opinions, activities or agendas, but the more they interact the greater the requirement to coordinate their states. As long as we build a big wall separating us we can all go on doing our different things without any coordination or emergent organization. But when we take down that wall, we may well all come into initial conflict but it will be more difficult for us in the long run to maintain our divergent activities and there will be a much higher reward for coordinating our activities. We might say this is one of the dynamics at play in our world today, globalization and hyperconnectivity have taken down the boundaries that previously divided societies and cultures, which enabled them to remain divergent for a prolonged period, but with this connectivity they are brought into contact and often conflict but at the same time it is making common consensus more valuable and remaining divergent more costly. It is this dense peer-to-peer interaction which fuels the process of self-organization.

"When the sage's work is done the people will say, 'We did it ourselves'"- Lao Tzu

What we find then is that those members that interact more often and come to some form of consensus or coordination then form an attractor. Because they are now working together they are more effective than the other members in the organization, thus generating better results which make it more attractive for others to join that organization because they will get a greater reward from it. We now get a positive feedback loop as the more people that join the organization the more valuable it becomes for future prospective members to do likewise.

This is the social network effect that is driven by positive feedback, and it is behind the rapid expansion of many forms of organization, such a financial markets, where the more people there are in the market the more liquidity which reduces transaction cost, which attracts more traders and so on. Another classical example would be the spread of English as a global language, whereas previously we had many different societies speaking different languages, with the increase in global connectivity it has become more valuable for us to have some common global language. Now that English has largely occupied that position there is a positive feedback loop around it, the more people that learn it the more valuable it becomes for others to learn. Even though only a small percentage of the global population speaks English natively and even though there are other languages that are spoken natively by many more people, English will likely remain the global language because of its initial head start and this feedback loop that drives its development. The net result of this process is the emergence of some global pattern of coordination.

"It doesn’t have linear material causality, that is the most common understanding of causality within most management. So you can’t say if i do this I will get that result, complexity theory effectively a priori invalidates any method that says it can produce a defined result and that actually changes the game, if you have to manage with systems that are dispositional you have to manage in a radically different way. You have to manage the evolutionary potential of the present moment in time and adjust as you go"- David Snowden Cognitive Edge

A large section of our management paradigm is built up around the idea that the function of management is to get people to do what they would not spontaneously do. And this makes sense because if people spontaneously did what you wanted them to do then you obviously would not need management in this sense. So within this traditional paradigm, the idea of self-organization looks totally contradictory to the whole endeavor of management, it might be legitimate to ask do we need management if we have self-organization? The answer is, of course, yes, or else there would be little point in this whole course, but management in this new context has to be redefined, as we have discussed it is all about leading by creating or designing the future context, and this is where design thinking fits into management, we are designing the context, instead of directly controlling and coordinating.

David Snowden talks about managing self-organizing teams as being like managing your child's birthday party. One would take a very different approach to organizing a child's birthday party as one would to managing a traditional organization. You would not specify roles for each child that comes to the party, get them to clock in, set them deadlines for completing certain projects and so on. The reason you don't do this is because you are not looking for a direct outcome to this organization, what we are hoping for is a self-organizing emergent outcome, where people interact and out of that interaction we get the emergence of the children enjoying themselves, a child's party.

But even though we are not trying to manage the system in a formal fashion, if we want the desired outcome we still need to organize the party, it is not going to happen at all otherwise. And what we are doing when we do that is creating the context that will induce the children to interact and self-organize. We put toys out, we make a little sports field out back where they can kick a ball around, we get a clown, some balloons, put some music on, all of these are creating the context. We create this context and put all these things out but we don't tell the children which ones to play with, what we will see is that attractors will spontaneously form around some of the things and the children will be drawn into that for some time and during that time we will get the emergence of the fun party that we hoped for.

Another example of this approach to management would be Google giving their employees time off to work on projects of their own interest. Google isn't, of course, doing this out of the pure goodness of their heart they, of course, hope for some desired outcome, namely new innovations, but they know that the development of new ideas takes time and space, like learning it is a self-organizing process, new different ideas have to be tested, interact and combined before some coherent functional pattern may emerge. In order for Google's management to enable this they have to create a space that engages people's self-motivation for the process to take place, they can then, later on, reap the benefits of what emerges out of this.

**Complex Project Management**

**Overview**

In 2009 the Project Management Institute PMI announced their book of the year as the publication entitled "Managing Complex Projects, A New Model" declaring it a groundbreaking study of complex project management. In the preface to the book the author writes: "It is now becoming clear that our conventional project management processes are inadequate when managing complex projects. Research is underway by the Project Management Institute, and others to determine what makes projects complex and to learn how to manage project complexity. Many thought leaders in the field of project management are presenting alternative approaches to managing complex projects. We are now realizing that new approaches are desperately needed to manage complex projects in the ever-changing global economic environment."

The book goes on to talk about how for organizations to survive and thrive in today's global economy, they must find ways to dramatically improve the performance of large-scale projects. It talks about how applying the concepts of complexity theory can complement conventional project management approaches and enable us to adapt to this new context of having to deliver large scale complex projects under uncertainty and volatility.

A project is a temporary endeavor composed of a set of tasks that are coordinated into achieving a particular result. It is designed to execute on the organization’s strategy. Tasks are integrated into processes to ensure the work is coordinated and completed within a given set of constraints such as time, quality, scope, and budget. Thus projects have a set of boundaries that define them and they take place within a particular environment. Like organizations, projects are systems. They can be simple, linear systems or complex systems. In this section, we are going to talk about the qualitative difference between the two, so as to understand why we need a fundamentally different approach to our traditional project management methods. We will start by talking about the nature of linear standardized projects with some examples.

**Simple Projects**

Moving house is an example of a simple standardized project. It is a relatively straightforward process. We know the current state of the system (our present house with all our things in it). We know the desired end result (the house we are moving to with all our things there). The environment within which our moving house project will take place is relatively stable and predictable. Thus the project simply consists of completing a very limited number of well-defined stages in a sequential order.

There are of course many examples of more complicated projects. Building an airplane is a good example of a complicated project. There are many parts, many instructions that need to be followed exactly, and many stages that need to be completed over a prolonged period of time. But although complicated, it is still a linear deterministic project. We know the starting state, the desired end state, and we can decompose the project into a clear set of sequences that follow a deterministic linear projection.

We cam then itemize the key features to standardized projects so that we are clear about them. Firstly, we are dealing with a well-defined project: With these standardized projects, the statement of work, the scope of the project and its boundaries are reasonably well defined. We know where we are, and we know where we want to go. Secondly, the project can be decomposed: The project can be decomposed into a set of stages and these stages can be performed in isolation and then recombined to produce the end result. Thirdly, the environment is relatively stable and predictable: The environment is unchanging and there are a limited number of elements interacting in a well known linear fashion, making extreme events, extremely unlikely. Fourthly, standardized procedures can be applied: We can use a project management methodology that has been developed and undergone continuous improvements after use on several previous projects. We are able to use best practices and lessons learned. We follow the well defined life-cycle phases, and we have forms, templates, checklists, and guidelines to assist us through each phase.

"Of the various elements that combine to make long-duration projects complex, the most significant is the inevitable changes that will occur in the business environment, which will necessitate adjustments to virtually all elements of the project. Knowing this, the successful project leadership team evolves, practicing situational project leadership, adapting and modifying their approach to accommodate the inevitable changes. In addition to adapting to change, the sheer size of the work involved for large projects weighs heavy on the project team. Research has demonstrated that the smaller the project team and the fewer deliverables, the greater the likelihood of project success” - Project Management Times

**Complexity**

Much of our project management methods were developed during the industrial age to deal with projects of this nature and have proven effective and scalable in delivering large-scale industrial projects, from building national power grids to landing people on the moon. The problem arises when we have to deal with more complex situations, which is increasingly the case. So let’s start with an example of a complex project.

One example of this might be trying to improve the standard of living within a particularly disadvantaged area of a city. We are dealing with many diverse elements from crime prevention to education to public services, infrastructure, social workers and so on, multiple stakeholders who have disparate opinions about the current state of the system and its desired future state.

Added to this, the neighborhood represents a unique social, cultural and economic mix that would reject any standardized process or procedure for altering it. The environment within which the project takes place may be dynamic and volatile, a financial crash may occur within the broader economy or there may be a major change in the political regime. Lastly, we are dealing with a whole system. Optimizing any component in isolation would be of limited value in achieving our desired outcome. We would need to work across traditional boundaries creating synergies to tackle interdisciplinary problems from different dimensions.

So let’s analyze this project a bit more to untangle what makes it truly complex instead of just complicated. To start with, we are not exactly sure where we are and where we are going with the project. In complex projects, we do not have complete information and knowledge of the system we are dealing with. We may be starting the project with an ill-defined scope, thereby requiring numerous scope changes throughout the project and, consequently having a moving target as an end point. In such a case we have to take a step and then see where we are and what the goal is and then readjust. The outcomes cannot be envisaged at the inception of the project then delivered as planned, but constant adaptation is required.

Secondly, complex and volatile environments: As with our example previously, complex projects are open to their environment, meaning they are interdependent on and embed within larger systems. Projects may be subject to constant and volatile change. Change in technologies, change in the business and market environment, change in organizational structure and policy, and change among the project’s key stakeholders and the strategic directions, which are often outside the direct control of the project team. As we have seen in previous lectures these complex environments are nonlinear, meaning there is also a much higher likelihood of extreme events occurring.

Thirdly, standard procedures cannot be used: Complex projects are more like living organisms than machines for which we can have instruction manuals. They have to evolve over time in response to the particular local conditions, and they may go through phase transition into new unpredictable states.

Lastly, complex projects cross traditional boundaries and deal with multiple diverse stakeholders: There is often a complex social dimension to large projects. Governance will appear in the hands of many rather than in the hands of few. Stakeholders may represent widely divergent political, cultural and social values and beliefs. Within this environment, there is a strong need to create a context for a common understanding of objectives. Communications and stakeholder analysis become central.

**Uncertainty**
Not exactly sure where we are and where we are going with the project

**Volatility**
Complex and volatile environments subject to constant change

**Non-Routine**
Project takes place within a unique context and is non-standardized

**Boundless**
No fixed boundary; interconnected with many social and technical systems

**The nature of Wicked Problems**

**Overview**

With developed economies reaching the end of the process of industrialization we have witnessed the rise of new forms of highly complex challenges that have moved to the forefront of social concerns. Challenges such as climate change, inequality, environmental degradation, terrorism, global financial instability, multicultural integration or cyber security.

These are challenges of a qualitatively different kind to the core issues we faced during the process of industrialization. If we turn the clock back a hundred years or two hundred years the kind of challenges we faced, although complicated were much simpler in their nature. The challenge of building and coordinating the railroads, of building the modern nation state, and the bureaucracy required to provide its public services effectively, we had the challenge of building skyscrapers for the first time, of flying around the world or landing someone on the moon. Today we can manage complicated rail networks that span the entire European continent, we expect to have a nice meal and watch a film while on flight to the other side of the planet and we can build skyscrapers, virtually anywhere in the world, like we are cutting out cookies.

All though these problems are certainly not simple, they are of a different nature to a problem like escalating inequality and it is these complex systemic challenges that are a central part of 21st Century reality. In fact, we may note that many of these wicked problems can be understood to have derived from the set of solutions we developed during the Industrial Age. These industrial age systems of organization that were once great achievements have in many ways reached the end of their life cycle and we are left with some of the limitations in their initial design, the combustion of fossil fuels that served us so well for centuries, being a classical example. As Einstein would say "We can't solve problems by using the same kind of thinking we used when we created them." These wicked problems we face today require a new skill set and new more collaborative systems of organization to tackle.

"You have to be able to look the task in the face without shrinking from it, without having rose tinted spectacles and imagining utopian futures. You have to understand the dynamics of the system the constraints that sit with us as human beings and you have to understand exactly how difficult that task is. But we also know that hope matters, a positive vision of a world that can work really matters and the more you look at that task of creating a different type of society and economy, actually, the more avenues you find for a possibility of change" - Tim Jackson Economist

Wicked problems are highly complex problems. They are unstructured, open-ended; they are multi-dimensional, systemic and may have no known solution. In many ways, we can think of wicked problems as essentially dysfunctionalities within a complex system. Where we have the complex system of the human body, we have the wicked problem of healthcare. Where we have advanced economies we have the wicked problem of extreme inequality, and where we have the internet we have cyber-crime.

In all these cases the problem can not be isolated and separated from the system, these wicked problems are systemic in nature, they can be understood as an emergent phenomenon of how the local components interact, of how the system works, and not simply one part of the system, that can be isolated, tackled and solved in a linear fashion. The concept of a wicked problem first derives from social planning and political science. Horst Rittel and Melvin Webber formally described the concept of wicked problems back in the 1970s, contrasting it with relatively "tame,” solvable problems. So let’s talk about some of these tame problems first. Examples of tame problems might be solving a jigsaw puzzle, finding the shortest route from A to B on a map, or repairing a computer. These standard problems share a number of features in common.

Firstly, they have a clear boundary. There is a well-defined and stable problem statement, which has a definite stopping point, that is, when the solution is reached. It is relatively simple to say what is part of the problem and what is not. Next, there are a finite number of elements interacting, and given enough analysis we can fully understand the system, the drivers in the system, and the causes and effects. Think about fixing a car. It may be complicated but there is a manual somewhere where all the parts and interactions within the car can be known. There are widely shared values to the nature of the problem. Thus, it becomes a technical problem where there is a solution that can be objectively evaluated as right or wrong. And lastly, we are dealing with a static problem. It does not change over time. Think of fixing a light bulb. The actual problem stays the same throughout the process.

Tame problems can be standardized, that is, they belong to a class of similar problems, which can all be solved in a similar way. And thus, over the course of the past few centuries, with the rise of modern science, we have developed a powerful and standardized set of methods within mathematics and engineering for solving tame problems, even when they get very complicated.

**Complexity**

Wicked problems are qualitatively different from tame problems largely due to the fact that we are dealing with open systems instead of closed ones. Climate change is one of the best examples of wicked problems, as is the challenge of global governance or multiculturalism. All of these challenges have a number of features that make them highly complex and non-amenable to our traditional approach in which problems are defined, analyzed and solved in sequential steps.

Firstly, because we are dealing with open systems, they are often unbounded in space and time. They cross disciplines, borders, and departments, making them very difficult to structure. You will often hear the word ‘messy’ used when people talk about wicked problems. They are also open in scope. The more you probe into the problem space, the more it expands into different dimensions. Unlike our tame problems, they have no stopping rule. Terrorism might be an example of this. It slips through the fingers of powerful governments and searching for its root cause will take you on an open-ended exploration of many different social-cultural, political and economic dimensions.

Wicked problems are multidimensional. Not only are they interconnected on many scales from the micro to the macro, but they are also composed of multiple different social, economic, technical and environmental factors. There is no one standardized global solution that fits all. Coupled with this is the fact that these problems involve a strong cultural dimension. They are deeply qualitative, involving human values and deeply entrenched socio-political dynamics. Again, climate change is a good example, as is systemic political deadlock.

Next, these problems have many deep interconnections and interdependencies. The systems we are dealing with in these wicked problems are intricately interconnected, interdependent and nonlinear. The problem of tackling poverty might be an example of this. It is strongly interconnected with many different areas from economic inequality to racism, to education, to public services and so on. With these highly interconnected problems, when you try to pull on one part you end up getting the whole thing.

Lastly, complex problems are dynamic. They evolve over time. Events are continuously changing. Problems and solutions are entwined as they co-evolve, with the definition of the problem itself also evolving. Coupled to this is the fact that the different components are often autonomous and adapting to their own incentives and local environment with limited central authority. The challenge of global governance is a good example of this, where authority to act still resides on the national level, and thus, the international political environment is the product of continuously evolving local level interactions and adaptations. Overcoming this to find common global consensuses and coordination is proven very difficult.

In response to the intimidating nature of wicked problems, many people feel overwhelmed and respond with denial of the problem or resignation and determinism, resulting in inertia. Another typical response is to try to turn a complex problem into a simple one in a number of different ways, such as describing a related problem or a sub-problem that you can solve and declare that to be the problem, or creating objective parameters by which to measure the solution’s success with whatever is not measured, being then free to absorb the real problem, that is to say, just shifting the problem from one place to another, which is very easy given the scale of the problem. Attempting to tame a wicked problem in this way, while appealing in the short run, will clearly fail in the long run. The wicked problem will reassert itself perhaps in a different form, or worse, the tame solution may exacerbate the problem.

Truly, tackling complex problems requires systems thinking to see the bigger picture and to integrate the many different perspective and dimensions to the problem. By seeing the system as a whole, we can get a real idea of the true nexus that makes up the core constraints at the heart of the problem. We need to gain a fundamental perspective that encapsulates the most diametrically opposed views and then work backwards to be able to contextualize the diverse perspectives on the problem.

**Open Systems**
Open systems that are often unbounded in space and time

**Multidimensional**
Composed of multiple different social, economic, technical factors

**Interdependent**
Intricately interconnected, interdependent and nonlinear

**Evolutionary**
Events are continuously changing as problems and solutions co-evolve

Wicked problems involve social complexity, and thus, we need to develop a platform for building a common understanding of the problem. This means being able to communicate the complexity of the problem in a way that is accessible to all, creating a paradigm within which people can integrate their own context and meanings. Tackling these problems requires a strong infrastructure of trust and collaboration to overcome the need for a long-term sustained investment where there is a lack of short-term incentives. Analysis of the stakeholders and the power dynamics surrounding the situation are critical to successfully designing stakeholder collaboration. Empathy and active listening are required to be able to effectively map out the diverse set of views and opinions that we need to integrate. Finally, having created a platform for the co-creation of solutions we need an iterative, experimental approach to developing the project due to the co-evolutionary nature of problems and solutions.

**Principles Of**
**Agile Project Management**

**Overview**

Only 35 percent of projects are successful (delivered on time, on budget and with full scope of features and functions), 46 percent are challenged (the project is completed and the new solution is operational, but it was late and over budget, with reduced features and functions), and 19 percent fail (do not deliver anything of value) – the Standish Group’s 2007 first quarter research report.

When we are operating within a stable and predictable environment we can break projects down into stages and use a linear process of stepping through them stage by stage until completion at the end. However complex projects take place within dynamic environments that may be subject to almost continuous change. The level of uncertainty and unpredictability is high and we are not sure of what the end goal is exactly. This necessitates an alternative approach to project management – one that is more flexible, adaptive and evolutionary. This new approach finds its clearest expression within what is called agile project development. Agile was first employed within software development and we can contrast it with its predecessor called the waterfall model.

The waterfall model is a sequential design process, used in software development, in which progress is seen as flowing steadily downwards (like a waterfall) through the phases of conception, initiation, analysis, design, construction, testing, production/implementation and maintenance. The waterfall development model originates in the manufacturing and construction industries.

With agile project development requirements and solutions evolve through collaboration between self-organizing, cross-functional teams. It promotes adaptive planning, evolutionary development, early delivery, continuous improvement and encourages rapid and flexible response to change. It is a conceptual framework that focuses on frequently delivering small increments of working solutions.

**1. Agile Is Holistic**

Agile project development has been compared to building an airplane in the sky. You just get enough done to get it into the sky and then you continue to build upon it from there. Instead of breaking a project down into discrete states before being completed at the end, agile creates the whole project in one and then builds upon that. In agile project development, requirements and solutions evolve through collaboration between self-organizing, cross-functional teams. It promotes adaptive planning, evolutionary development, early delivery, continuous improvement, and encourages rapid and flexible response to change. It is a conceptual framework that focuses on frequently delivering small increments of a working product.

**2. Agile Is Rapid**

We can think of Agile development as very much like rapid prototyping. With agile project management, projects are managed within small chunks of work. It is designed to deliver value to the organization through frequent small improvements to the product, what are called features.

**3. Agile Is Evolutionary**

These rapid prototypes allow us to probe the environment, gaining feedback to see where we are and where the end point might be. Feedback is a key part of agile development, with the response to each sprint feeding back into the next one, thus allowing for the constant interaction between the problem and the solution as they co-evolve over time.

**4. Agile Is Self-organizing**

Management commits to guiding the evolution of behaviors that emerge from the interaction of independent agents instead of specifying in advance what the behavior should be. The team figures out for itself how to turn the backlog of work into a finished product. Agile teams are often small, typically under 15 people. They are co-located for face-to-face interaction and they favor individuals and interactions over processes and tools.

**5. Agile Is Iterative**

Agile works through small iterations called sprints, which typically happen over the course of just a few weeks. A backlog of work is created and each sprint completes a small set of new features and then takes end user experience as feedback to be added to the backlog. Each iteration involves a cross-functional team working in all functions: planning, requirements analysis, design, coding, unit testing, and acceptance testing. Peer review and communications are key.

**The VUCA World**

**Overview**

A number of major vectors of change - such as the rapid growth of globalization, information technology, and a changing environmental context - are all working to take us into a much more complex world. This new world is interconnected, interdependent, nonlinear and volatile. Over the past few decades, an acronym has emerged within the business community to identify the fundamental internal and external conditions that affect organizations within this more complex environment. This acronym is called VUCA, and it stands for volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity.

The common usage of the term VUCA began in the 1990s and derives from military vocabulary, where it refers to the experience of officers in operations. It tries to capture the uncertain and dynamically changing situation of a military engagement where there is a lack of information. Events often just happen in a chaotic and unpredictable fashion in what is also called the "fog of war". Military commanders sometimes describe this as being in a world of unknown unknowns – this is the extreme version of a VUCA world. In this section, we will discuss how to develop strategies for operating within this VUCA environment. Firstly it is important to give some outline as to the nature of strategy itself and our traditional approach to it in a non-VUCA world.

Strategic management involves the formulation and implementation of major goals and initiatives taken by an organization’s top management, based on an assessment of the internal and external environment in which the organization operates. Thus, how we approach strategy will obviously change in response to the environment within which our organization is operating.

A basic premise of complexity management would be that over the past few decades with the rise of information technology, financialization, globalization and sustainability the world has gone from connected to hyperconnected, from linear to nonlinear, from a simpler system to a more complex system, and that strategy must, in turn, respond to this change in context to be successful.

**Traditional Strategy**

Owing to its origins within industrial age manufacturing, much of our modern management theory is focused on stable, predictable, routine environments, where there is one relatively clear objective. These factors make possible an approach to strategy that is based on a few key concepts and methods.

Firstly that there is one optimal goal or solution: Within these relatively static environments where there is one clearly defined metric for performance, such as maximizing revenue, there can be one right answer, one optimal solution. And thus, the aim is to obtain all the information required and perform analysis upon it to identify this optimal solution. The objective then is to guide the organization towards this desired outcome through the control of the elements within the organization.

Secondly fixed future projections: Due to limited volatility and the high level of predictability within the environment, we can project past experience and data onto the future and use risk-based analysis to calculate and ascribe quantitative payoffs to a limited number of future possibilities.

Lastly the use of progress planning: The progress towards our ultimate goal can be broken down into stages. We can create clear metrics for each stage, and the movement through these stages is typically seen to be a linear incremental process.

This approach to strategy works fine until we turn up the volatility, uncertainty and complexity within the environment. Turning a rapidly changing external environment to our advantage requires a recalibration of many dimensions across how we develop, deploy and deliver our strategies, and this is where complexity management finds its application in offering us an alternative paradigm with which to lead organizations. So let’s take a quick look at the different dimensions of the VUCA world and the response complexity management offers to this challenging environment.

"Back in 1958, a company could expect to stay on the list (S&P) for 61 years. These days, the average is just 18 years" - Antonio Regalado MIT Technology Review

**Volatility**

In systemically volatile environments, change is a constant and our strategy needs to evolve from resisting it to working with it. This means creating organizations that are resilient through their agility and capacity for adaptation. The strategic emphasis shifts from creating fixed well-defined goals and plans to trying to create agile organizations led by a clarity of vision and effective communications, so that it can be very clear about its values and objective but very flexible in how it implements capabilities and achieves its vision.

Complex systems are said to exist at a far-from equilibrium state, meaning that they consume a lot of energy so that they are able to avoid their lowest energy state (otherwise known as equilibrium) and are able to continuously change and evolve. This is what physicists call a dynamic system and it is one of the key properties of complex systems. Biological systems are good examples of dynamic systems they require a constant input of energy in order to maintain homeostasis(live) and grow.

Another feature to complex systems is that they can flip from one state to another very rapidly, through what is called a phase transition. A phase transition doesn’t just change some of the systems properties, it changes the structure and makeup of the system itself, the actual parameters that define it. Think about a butterfly changing into a caterpillar, this is a phase transition it is a systemic change, the metrics and the vocabulary we used to describe the creature before and after the transition are fundamentally different.

The result of this is that complex systems are volatile, meaning they are constantly changing, they can change very fast and importantly their state can change drastically, that is, shift from one regime to another - Dubai’s transition from traditional fishing village to global metropolis within a few decades is an example of a rapid phase transition or regime shift.

**Volatile/**
Liable to change rapidly and unpredictably, especially for the worse

The rapid pace of change within the global economy has been driven largely by technological development, as the rate of technological innovation has greatly increased over the past few decades with the advent of information technology and today the rise of clean technology. Coupled with this has been the expansion of the global economy as many more countries have joined, creating an environment of heightened competition. Within this environment corporations are eager for a competitive advantage through innovation, the net result is a rapid drive forward of technological development.

As globalization takes us into this expanded global environment, the distribution of possible states to organizations and their environment is greatly broadened. For example in this global environment a business may be operating in both an economy with a GDP per capita of six hundred dollars or fifty thousand dollars, working under a dictatorship or alongside a pluralistic democracy.

Heightened Interconnectivity and interdependency means volatility is no longer just a local event but it is increasingly systemic, financial crises are no longer contained to a particular country, they affect the entire global financial system. Climate change is another example that alters some of earth's most fundamental systems and thus creates systemic volatility. With these systemic shocks no one is too big to fail, by definition complex systems are always greater than any one of their constituent elements, meaning every element is dependent upon and vulnerable to changes within the system as a whole.

“Back then(2010) about 60% of our business was in the predictable area where we were able to use statistical forecasts to predict the future and it was a relatively low effort in those days to be able to demand plan. In a VUCA world, we are in an unpredictable world and our strategy has moved so that there is less use of statistical forecast to predict the future and we are having to really rely heavily on business intelligence which requires a totally new level of effort” - James Lennon, Procter & Gamble

**Uncertainty**

Uncertainty is the inability to know everything fully. This uncertainty is derived from the large number of elements within the system, their nonlinear interactions and their capacity to adapt to local events as they evolve over time, this means that in these complex systems the future emerges, the outcome to an emergent process can not be known beforehand. Trying to compute the actual details and define a single future scenario is a lost endeavor. In environments where uncertainty is pervasive, our traditional risk-based analysis of the future breaks down. The only way to respond to this is to perform multiple simulations and experiments that will allow us to explore how things will really play out on the ground and to maintain a diverse and complementary system that is capable of responding to a number of different possible environmental conditions.

Uncertainty is a fundamental feature of complex systems, we have already discussed a number of reasons why this is so, such as the very large number of elements we are typically dealing with and the often unknown nonlinear interconnections and interdependencies. But beyond this is the uncertainty owing to the fact that we are not dealing with a deterministic machine, complex systems are more like living organisms they evolve over time and this is a key source of inherent uncertainty. Determinism is the idea that events and actions are already predetermined and to know the future we just need to discover the rules by which they operate is the default assumption within many economic and business theories. Determinism does not allow for individual agency to create the future. In contrary the idea that the autonomous actions of agents within the system create its overall state is a key assumption within complexity theory, thus the future is not determined it is created through the local actions and interactions of elements.

The elements within a complex system are capable of autonomous adaptation, this means whether we are dealing with traders within a financial market, voters within an election or employees within a business we cannot fully control their behavior, their behavior is a product of their adaptation to events within their local environment, every time they adapt they change the environment that other elements are responding to, this is called co-evolution.

Co-evolution describes the interconnected and interdependent development of an agent and its environment. The actions the agents take effect their environment and this, in turn, feeds back to affect the actions of the agents. Coevolution leads to a very rapid growth in the number of possible future states to a system that are very hard to determine. There are many examples of coevolution within ecosystems such as between the honey bee and the plants they pollinate which in turn provide them with nectar, each is dependent upon the other, a change in one will trigger a change within the other. Computer software and hardware can be considered as two separate components but tied intrinsically by coevolution. these systems depend upon each other and advance step by step through a kind of evolutionary process. Changes in hardware or operating system may introduce new features that are then incorporated into the corresponding applications running alongside and vice versa.

Under the paradigm of determinism, the future can be predicted and known for certain. This will inevitably lead to an approach that invests heavily in data, information and statistical analysis. The net result will be a future represented as a set of probabilities upon which we can apply our traditional calculations (risk-based analysis, ROIs etc ) in order to determine which is the optimal strategy.

If the organization and environment are truly stable, nonvolatile and deterministic - as some are - then this method works well, but in more complex environments it can be no less than dangerous and delusional as it can blind us to the underlying complexity that is really governing how the system functions. Uncertainty means there is no one optimal solution as their may be many different states to the future environment (or event the present environment) the main way to respond to this is to develop a diverse system that is capable of operating within as many different environments as possible, resilient and robust through its multi-functionality.

Thus our strategy shifts from defining one environment in the future that is most probable and creating a single focused strategy in response to this projection, to one of investing more in understanding the major trends that shape the environment and developing projects and organizations that will be able to operate within a wide set of parameters by maintaining diversity within the system. Our aversion to uncertainty is deep and primordial it implies the lack of control that is required for our survival, it signals danger. Our strategies and organizations are traditionally designed to function within one well structured and relatively ordered environments - so as to be able to maintain control -outside of this their capacity to operate often diminishes very rapidly. Uncertainty and volatile environments require us to develop organizations that are less dependent upon a single structured and ordered environment but are better able to operate within multiple, even semi-chaotic, environments. Diversity allows systems to maintain operations outside of their usual operating parameters and to fail gracefully.

"I believe what we have created with our hands now is a system of systems, a network of networks, a network of data and telecommunications, that is so interconnected, hyperconnected and interdependent and complex, that it mirrors only one other thing in our experience and that's the natural world" - Thomas Friedman Author

**Complexity**

In a recent set of face to-face interviews with 1,541 CEOs conducted by IBM research. These CEOs identified complexity as their greatest challenge going forward. I will quote from the report when is said. "In our past three global CEO studies, CEOs consistently said that coping with change was their most pressing challenge. In 2010, our conversations identified a new primary challenge: complexity. CEOs told us they operate in a world that is substantially more volatile, uncertain and complex. Many shared the view that incremental changes are no longer sufficient in a world that is operating in fundamentally different ways."

The report goes on to say that quote "Seventy-nine percent of CEOs anticipate even greater complexity ahead… But a surprising number of CEOs told us they feel ill-prepared for today’s more complex environment."When people talk about complexity within the VUCA framework they are referring to interconnectivity and interdependence. The nonlinear interactions and interdependencies within complex organizations render our capacity for control over the system through direct intervention limited. In complex systems, we cannot always know what the outcome to our interventions will be due to these nonlinear interactions and interdependencies. Thus, our capacity to directly align the elements of the organization towards some desired future goal is limited. The main response to this is for a leader to focus on creating the context that enables the organization to succeed.

"Complexity is a given in today's world and it is increasing every day to gain a competitive advantage in this ever more competitive environment companies need to master complexity" - Boston Consulting Group

Complex systems are highly interconnected and interdependent, but added to this is the fact that things are interconnected synergistically – that is to say, we can’t just simply summate the differing strands of a problem because strands are interdependent and affect each other. this one of the true sources of complexity. Whereas we may have a good understanding of an organization or environment in terms of its different components and their properties - departments and their budgets or countries and their GDP etc. - what we often lack is knowledge of the interconnections, the interdependencies and synergies, these are less tangible, more difficult to quantify and elusive to our tradition analytical models, but within complex systems where the connectivity is deep they are very significant to the actual functioning of the system. The net result of this is that we do not always know what the outcome to a direct intervention within the system will be.

The Iraq war of 2003 may be cited as an example of this, a nation such as Iraq is a complex system of multiple, densely interconnected social, political, cultural and economic institutions. The Allied invasion was a direct intervention in order to achieve a clear objective of removing the contemporary regime. The result – the output to the system - was a set of nonlinear interactions leading to an unintended chaotic scenario.

Traditionally we try to exclude complexity - so as to be able to centrally control the system - we divide up the organization into well-defined components so that they will operate through simple cause and effect interactions in a mechanical fashion. Accepting and harnessing complexity means giving up the capacity to centrally control and directly influence the different parts of the organization. So how then can the organization achieve any collective, desired objective?

Managing complexity means to a certain extent giving up the traditional concept of strategy and leadership - that is creating goals and directly aligning the organization's elements towards achieving them - and instead focusing more on creating the context that will enable organizations to be able to succeed, thrive and develop. This means having a vision of where the organization is going, its values and embedding this in the DNA of the organization so that it can adapt to change on the local level, reducing the need for interventions. Thus it is about the creation of a context that enables the emergence of the desired outcomes. We may not be able to intervene or directly control the outcome to events but we can manage the initial conditions, the tools, protocols and connections, all of which influences the context within which the organization's elements generate outcomes.

"I would not give a fig for the simplicity this side of complexity, but I would give my life for the simplicity on the other side of complexity” -Oliver Holmes Justice of the Supreme Court

**Ambiguity**

When environments become complex, simple linear cause and effect descriptions of events break down and ambiguity arises due to this lack of models to explain the observed phenomena. Resolving ambiguity means understanding the context within which the event takes place. It requires systems thinking to see the interconnections, to gain different perspectives in order to build up the full context within which an event can be properly understood.

Ambiguity is the quality of being open to more than one interpretation. It results in the haziness of reality; the potential for misreading and mixed meanings to conditions. We can no longer see what is behind things, events just happen and they remain open to a number of different interpretations as to why. Traditionally we search for linear cause and effect models to explain phenomena within our environment, reductionism in management reduces our description of phenomena to a single dimensional perspective, this creates very brittle models that are black and white, either right or wrong.

When environments become more complex our traditional linear cause and effect models start to break down, become redundant and even worse a hindrance to the acceptance of not knowing. The end result can be a shock, aka a reality check. Due to their black and white nature, linear models do not fail gracefully. Complex environments require us to invest more in developing models that capture the context within which events play out. This means a switch from trying to analyze and understand the events themselves in isolation to understanding the space around them that gives them context (what artist call the negative space).

This is where systems thinking comes in. Systems thinking places a greater enforces upon understanding the relations that give an object or event its place within some broader environment it is a part of. Instead of trying to describe and understand the event by describing its properties, systems thinking reasons backward, by first having an overview to the environment we can understand a system through its connections to other systems within that environment and thus understand it with respect to its place within the whole environment it is a part of. By looking at the whole environment that the event or object is a part of, we can gain multiple different perspectives (through each of its different connections) each perspective will give us a richer and more robust multidimensional understanding.

The net result is a containment or confinement of ambiguity to a limited set of possible interpretations. Even if we do not fully understand the phenomena, by having a deeper understanding of the context we are able to have some parameters within which to interpret individual events. Thus it is still required that we learn to make decisions without absolute knowledge and information and are able to hold two contrasting ideas. Leaders in complex environments need to be able to handle ambiguity and make judgments when the ‘facts’ are unclear or evolving, in other words not be overly dependent upon quantitative, fact-based methods of reasoning in supporting their decision making, but be able to respond to the overall context instead

“Ambiguity is not, today, a lack of data, but a deluge of data” - Paul Gibbons Entrepreneur

A Complexity Economics Lab Publication
www.economicslab.io