# MC 2011-12 | Members of the Local Election Committee Under the Representative Assembly Termed as Election Deputies

## Metadata
- **MC Number**: MC-2011-12
- **Year**: 2011
- **Source**: [https://cda.gov.ph/memorandum-circulars/mc-2011-12-members-of-the-local-election-committee-under-the-representative-assembly-termed-as-election-deputies/](https://cda.gov.ph/memorandum-circulars/mc-2011-12-members-of-the-local-election-committee-under-the-representative-assembly-termed-as-election-deputies/)
- **PDF URL**: [https://cda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/MC2011-12-Members-of-the-Local-Election-Committee-Under-the-Representative-Assembly-Termed-as-Election-Deputies.pdf](https://cda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/MC2011-12-Members-of-the-Local-Election-Committee-Under-the-Representative-Assembly-Termed-as-Election-Deputies.pdf)

---

Republic of the Philippines
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
Department of Finance
COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
827 Aurora Boulevard, Immaculate Conception, Cubao, Quezon City, Philippines
Tel. No. (02)7255510;Tel/Fax (02)7258536
MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 2011‐12
Series of 2011
FOR : ALL CONCERNED
SUBJECT : THE MEMBERS OF THE LOCAL ELECTION COMMITTEE UNDER THE REPRESENTATIVE
ASSEMBLY TERMED AS ELECTION DEPUTIES
DATE : APRIL 7, 2011
Section 10 of Rule I‐Representative Assembly of the Rules and Regulations Implementing Certain
Provisions of the Philippine Cooperative Code of 2008 (RA 9520) provides that “each sector, chapter or
district during the General Assembly meeting approving the adoption of the Representative Assembly
shall elect its Local Election Committee that will conduct the election of sector, chapter, or district
Representative Delegate xxx. “
In relation to the above, the members of the Local Election Committee shall be termed as
“Election Deputies”. Being such, they shall not be considered as Officers of the Cooperative within the
meaning of Art 5 (11) of RA 9520.
For information and guidance.
APPROVED on April 7, 2011 per BOA Resolution No. 77, S‐2011.
FOR THE BOARD OF ADMINISTRATORS
BY:
(SGD)
EMMANUEL M. SANTIAGUEL, Ph.D.
Chairman
