# GR-181912

**RAMON M. ALFONSO vs. LAND BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES and DEPARTMENT OF AGRARIAN REFORM**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: RAMON M. ALFONSO vs. LAND BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES and DEPARTMENT OF AGRARIAN REFORM
- **Ponente**: Jardeleza, J.
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2016/nov2016/gr_181912_2016.html)

---

> **G.R. No. 181912, November 29, 2016,**
>
> ♦ Decision, Jardeleza, [J]
>
> ♦ Separate Concurring Opinion, Sereno, [CJ], Carpio [J],
>
> ♦ Dissenting Opinion, Velasco, Jr., [J]
>
> ♦ Concurring Opinion, Leonen, [J]
>
> **EN BANC**
>
> **November 29, 2016**
>
> G.R. Nos. 181912 & 183347
>
> RAMON M. ALFONSO, Petitioner
>
> vs.
> **LAND BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES and DEPARTMENT OF AGRARIAN REFORM**, Respondents
>
> **D E C I S I O N**
>
> JARDELEZA, *J.:*
>
> The main issue presented in this case concerns the legal duty of the courts, in the determination of just compensation under Republic Act No. 6657,1 (RA 6657), in relation to Section 17 of RA 6657 and the implementing formulas of the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR).
>
> The Court *En Banc* reaffirms the established jurisprudential rule, that is: until and unless declared invalid in a proper case, courts have the positive legal duty to consider the use and application of Section 17 and the DAR basic formulas in determining just compensation for properties covered by RA 6657. When courts, in the exercise of its discretion, find that deviation from the law and implementing formulas is warranted, it must clearly provide its reasons therefor.
>
> **The Case**
>
> This is a petition for review on *certiorari* of the Decision2 and Resolution,3 dated July 19, 2007 and March 4, 2008, respectively, of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. SP No. 90615 and CA-G.R. SP No. 90643. The Court of Appeals granted the individual petitions filed by the DAR and the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) and set aside the Decision4 dated May 13, 2005 of the Regional Trial Court fixing the total amount of ₱6,090,000.00 as just compensation.5
>
> **The Facts**
>
> Cynthia Palomar (Palomar) was the registered owner of two (2) parcels of land. One is located in San Juan, Sorsogon City, with an area of 1.6530 hectares covered by Transfer Certificate of Title (TCT) No. T-21136,6 and the other in Bibincahan, Sorsogon City, with an area of 26.2284 hectares covered by TCT No. T-23180.7
>
> Upon the effectivity of RA 6657, the DAR sought to acquire Palomar's San Juan and Bibincahan properties at a valuation of ₱36,066.27 and ₱792,869.06,8 respectively. Palomar, however, rejected the valuations.
>
> Land Valuation Case Nos. 68-01 and 70-01 were consequently filed before the DAR Provincial Adjudication Board (Board) for summary determination of just compensation. In the meantime, or on April 16, 2001, Palomar sold her rights over the two properties to petitioner Ramon M. Alfonso (Alfonso ).9
>
> Upon orders from the Board, the parties submitted their position papers and evidence to support their respective proposed valuations. On June 20, 2002, Provincial Adjudicator Manuel M. Capellan issued Decisions10 in Land Valuation Case Nos. 68-01 and 70-01.
>
> Applying DAR Administrative Order No. 5, Series of 1998, (DAR AO No. 5 [1998]), Provincial Adjudicator Capellan valued the properties as follows:
>
> > San Juan Property:
> >
> > |  |  |  |
> > | --- | --- | --- |
> > | **Land Value** | **=** | **CNI x 0.9 + MV x 0.1** |
