# GR-196596

**COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE vs. DE LA SALLE UNIVERSITY, INC.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE vs. DE LA SALLE UNIVERSITY, INC.
- **Ponente**: Brion, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2016/nov2016/gr_196596_2016.html)

---

> **G.R. No. 196596/G.R. No. 198841/G.R. No. 198941, November 9, 2016,**
>
> ♦ Decision, Brion, [J]
>
> ♦ Dissenting Opinion, Leonen, [J]
>
> **SECOND DIVISION**
>
> **November 9, 2016**
>
> G.R. No. 196596
>
> COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE, Petitioner
>
> vs.
> **DE LA SALLE UNIVERSITY, INC.**, Respondent
>
> x - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
>
> **G.R. No. 198841**
>
> DE LA SALLE UNIVERSITY INC., Petitioner,
>
> vs.
> **COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE,** Respondent.
>
> x - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
>
> **G.R. No. 198941**
>
> COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE, Petitioner,
>
> vs.
> **DE LA SALLE UNIVERSITY, INC.,** Respondent.
>
> **D E C I S I O N**
>
> BRION, *J.:*
>
> Before the Court are consolidated petitions for review on *certiorari:*1
>
> > 1. **G.R. No. 196596** filed by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue *(Commissioner)* to assail the December 10, 2010 decision and March 29, 2011 resolution of the Court of Tax Appeals (*CTA)* in *En Banc* Case No. 622;2
> >
> > 2. **G.R. No. 198841** filed by De La Salle University, Inc. *(DLSU)* to assail the June 8, 2011 decision and October 4, 2011 resolution in CTA *En Banc* Case No. 671;3 and
> >
> > 3. **G.R. No. 198941** filed by the Commissioner to assail the June 8, 2011 decision and October 4, 2011 resolution in CTA *En Banc* Case No. 671.4
>
> G.R. Nos. 196596, 198841 and 198941 all originated from CTA Special First Division *(CTA Division)* **Case No. 7303.** G.R. No. 196596 stemmed from **CTA *En Banc* Case No. 622** filed by the Commissioner to challenge CTA Case No. 7303. G.R. No. 198841 and 198941 both stemmed from **CTA *En Banc* Case No. 671** filed by DLSU to also challenge CTA Case No. 7303.
>
> **The Factual Antecedents**
>
> Sometime in 2004, the Bureau of Internal Revenue *(BIR)* issued to DLSU Letter of Authority (LOA) No. 2794 authorizing its revenue officers to examine the latter's books of accounts and other accounting records for all internal revenue taxes for the period *Fiscal Year Ending 2003 and Unverified Prior Years.*5
>
> On May 19, 2004, BIR issued a *Preliminary Assessment Notice* to DLSU.6
>
> Subsequently on August 18, 2004, the BIR through a *Formal Letter of Demand* assessed DLSU the following deficiency taxes: (1) *income tax* on rental earnings from restaurants/canteens and bookstores operating within the campus; (2) *value-added tax (VAI)* on business income; and (3) *documentary stamp tax (DSI)* on loans and lease contracts. The BIR demanded the payment of **₱17,303,001.12**, inclusive of surcharge, interest and penalty for **taxable years 2001, 2002 and 2003**.7
>
> DLSU protested the assessment. The Commissioner failed to act on the protest; thus, DLSU filed on August 3, 2005 a petition for review with the CTA Division.8
>
> DLSU, a *non-stock, non-profit educational institution,* principally anchored its petition on **Article XIV, Section 4 (3)** of the Constitution, which reads:
>
> > (3) All revenues and assets of non-stock, non-profit educational institutions used actually, directly, and exclusively for educational purposes shall be exempt from taxes and duties. xxx.
>
> On January 5, 2010, the CTA Division partially granted DLSU's petition for review. The dispositive portion of the decision reads:
>
> > **WHEREFORE**, the Petition for Review is **PARTIALLY GRANTED**. The DST assessment on the loan transactions of [DLSU] in the amount of ₱1,1681,774.00 is hereby **CANCELLED**. However, [DLSU] is **ORDERED TO PAY** deficiency income tax, VAT and DST on its lease contracts, plus 25% surcharge for the fiscal years 2001, 2002 and 2003 in the total amount of **₱18,421,363.53** ... xxx.
> >
> > In addition, [DLSU] is hereby held liable to pay 20% delinquency interest on the total amount due computed from September 30, 2004 until full payment thereof pursuant to Section 249(C)(3) of the [National Internal Revenue Code]. Further, the compromise penalties imposed by [the Commissioner] were excluded, there being no compromise agreement between the parties.
> >
> > **SO ORDERED**.9
>
> Both the Commissioner and DLSU moved for the reconsideration of the January 5, 2010 decision.10 On April 6, 2010, the CTA Division denied the Commissioner's motion for reconsideration while it held in abeyance the resolution on DLSU's motion for reconsideration.11
>
> On May 13, 2010, the Commissioner appealed to the CTA *En Banc* (CTA *En Banc* Case No. 622) arguing that DLSU's *use* of its revenues and assets for non-educational or commercial purposes removed these items from the exemption coverage under the Constitution.12
>
> On May 18, 2010, DLSU formally offered to the CTA Division supplemental pieces of documentary evidence to prove that its rental income was used actually, directly and exclusively for educational purposes.13 *The Commissioner did not promptly object to the formal offer of supplemental evidence despite notice.*14
>
> On July 29, 2010, the CTA Division, in view of the supplemental evidence submitted, reduced the amount of DLSU's tax deficiencies. The dispositive portion of the *amended decision* reads:
>
> **> WHEREFORE**, [DLSU]'s Motion for Partial Reconsideration is hereby **PARTIALLY GRANTED**. [DLSU] is hereby **ORDERED TO PAY** for deficiency income tax, VAT and DST plus 25% surcharge for the fiscal years 2001, 2002 and 2003 in the total adjusted amount of **₱5,506,456.71** ... xxx.
>
> In addition, [DLSU] is hereby held liable to pay 20% *per annum* deficiency interest on the ... basic deficiency taxes ... until full payment thereof pursuant to Section 249(B) of the [National Internal Revenue Code] ... xxx.
>
> Further, [DLSU] is hereby held liable to pay 20% *per annum* delinquency interest on the deficiency taxes, surcharge and deficiency interest which have accrued ... from September 30, 2004 until fully paid.15
