# GR-181892_SO

**Republic of the Philippines, et al. Vs. Hon. Jesus M. Mupas, et al./Republic of the Philippines, et al. Vs. Philippine International Air Terminals Company, Inc., et al./Takenaka Corporation and Asahikosan Corporation Vs. Republic of the Philippines, et al./Philippine National Air Terminals, Co., Inc. Vs. Republic of the Philippines, et al.**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: Republic of the Philippines, et al. Vs. Hon. Jesus M. Mupas, et al./Republic of the Philippines, et al. Vs. Philippine International Air Terminals Company, Inc., et al./Takenaka Corporation and Asahikosan Corporation Vs. Republic of the Philippines, et al./Philippine National Air Terminals, Co., Inc. Vs. Republic of the Philippines, et al.
- **Ponente**: Concurring Opinion
Leonen, J.
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2016/apr2016/gr_181892_so_2016.html)

---

> **Republic of the Philippines, et al. vs. Hon. Jesus M. Mupas, et al./Republic of the Philippines, et al. vs. Philippine International Air Terminals Company, Inc., et al./Takenaka Corporation and Asahikosan Corporation vs. Republic of the Philippines, et al./Philippine National Air Terminals, Co., Inc. vs. Republic of the Philippines, et al.,** G.R. No. 181892/G.R. No. 209917/G.R. No. 209696/G.R. No. 209731, April 19, 2016
>
> ♦ Decision, Brion [J]
>
> ♦ Concurring Opinion, Leonen [J]
>
> EN BANC
>
> **April 19, 2016**
>
> G.R. Nos. 181892
>
> REPUBLIC OF THE PIDLIPPINES, represented by Executive Secretary Eduardo R. Ermita, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS, MANILA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AUTHORITY, petitioners,
>
> vs.
> **HON. JESUS M. MUPAS, in bis capacity as Acting Presiding Judge of the Regional Trial Court, National Capital Region, Branch 117, Pasay City, and PHILIPPINE INTERNATIONAL AIR TERMINALS CO., INC.,** respondents.
>
> x - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
>
> **G.R. No. 209696**
>
> TAKENAKA CORPORATION AND ASAIDKOSAN CORPORATION, petitioners,
>
> vs.
> **REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES, represented by Executive Secretary Eduardo R. Ermita, the DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS, MANILA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AUTHORITY, AND PHILIPPINE INTERNATIONAL AIR TERMINALS COMPANY, INC.,** respondents;
>
> x - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
>
> **G.R. No. 209731**
>
> PHILIPPINE INTERNATIONAL AIR TERMINALS CO., INC., petitioner,
>
> vs.
> **REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES, represented by Executive Secretary Eduardo R. Ermita, the DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS, MANILA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AUTHORITY, AND PHILIPPINE INTERNATIONAL AIR TERMINALS COMPANY, INC.,** respondents;
>
> x - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
>
> **G.R. No. 209917**
>
> REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES, represented by Executive Secretary Eduardo R. Ermita, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS, MANILA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AUTHORITY, petitioners,
>
> vs.
> **PHILIPPINE INTERNATIONAL AIR TERMINALS CO., INC., TAKENAKA CORPORATION AND ASAHIKOSAN CORPORATION** respondents.
>
> **CONCURRING OPINION**
>
> LEONEN, *J.:*
>
> I concur, subject to the views I have expressed in the September 8, 2015 Decision of this Court En Banc. I also reiterate my reservations in the computation of interest rates for delayed payments for expropriated properties, · as explained in my Separate Opinions in *Secretary of the Department of Public Works and Highways v. Spouses* Tecson1and *Heirs of Spouses Tria* v. *Land Bank of the Phtlippines.*[[*2*]]
>
> **MARVIC M.V.F. LEONEN**
> Associate Justice
>
>
>
> **Footnotes**
>
> 1J. Leonen, Dissenting Opinion in *Department of Public Works and Highways v. Spouses Tecson* (Decision), G.R. No. 179334, July 1, 2013, 700 SCRA 243, 274-279 [Per J. Peralta, Third Division]; and J. Leonen, Dissenting Opinion in *Department of Public Works and Highways v. Spouses Tecson* (Resolution), G.R. No. 179334, April 21, 2015 <http://sc.judiciary.gov .ph/pdf/web/viewer.html?file=/jurisprudence/2015/april2015/179334 \_leonen.pd f.> [Per J. Peralta, Third Division].
>
> 2J. Leonen, Separate Opinion in- *Heirs of Spouses Tria v. Land /Jank of the Philippines,*  170245, July l, 2013, 700 SCRA 188, 200-209 [Per J. Peralta, Third Division].
>
>
>
