# GR-209271_SO

**International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications, Inc. vs. Greenpeace Southeast Asia (Philippines), et al./Environmental Management Bureau of the Department of Environmental and Natural Resources, et al. vs. Court of Appeals, et al./University of the Philippines Los Baños vs. Greenpeace Southeast Asia (Philippines), et al**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications, Inc. vs. Greenpeace Southeast Asia (Philippines), et al./Environmental Management Bureau of the Department of Environmental and Natural Resources, et al. vs. Court of Appeals, et al./University of the Philippines Los Baños vs. Greenpeace Southeast Asia (Philippines), et al
- **Ponente**: Concurring Opinion
Leonen, J.
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2016/jul2016/gr_209271_so_2016.html)

---

> **G.R. No. 209271/G.R. No. 209276/G.R. No. 209301/G.R. No. 209430 July 26, 2016,**
>
> ♦ Decision, Perlas-Bernabe, [J]
>
> ♦ Concurring Opinion, Leonen, [J]
>
> **CONCURRING OPINION**
>
> LEONEN, *J.:*
>
> I concur with the Resolution1 penned by my esteemed colleague Associate Justice Estela M. Perlas-Bernabe. In addition to her points, I reiterate by reference the points I raised in my Concurring Opinion,2 which was promulgated with the original Decision3 in this case.
>
> I reserve opinion on whether the "exceptional character of the situation and the paramount public interest"4 can be a ground for ruling on a case despite it becoming moot and academic. In my view, a more becoming appreciation of the judiciary's role in the entire constitutional order should always give pause to go beyond the issues crystallized by an actual case with a real, present controversy. Going beyond the parameters of a live case may be an invitation to participate in the crafting of policies properly addressed to the other departments and organs of government. I am of the belief that the judiciary should take an attitude of principled restraint.
>
> Nonetheless, I agree with the ponencia that the exception is not involved in this case.1âwphi1
>
> The constitutionality of Department of Agriculture Administrative Order No. 8, Series of 2002, was properly raised. In any case, there is now a new regulatory measure, the validity of which is not in issue. Whether the repealed Administrative Order was raised need no longer be discussed.
>
> **ACCORDINGLY,** I join the grant of the Motions for Reconsideration.
>
> **MARVIC M.V.F. LEONEN**
> Associate Justice
>
>
>
> **Footnotes**
>
> 1 *International Service for the Aquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications, Inc. v. Greenpeace Southeast Asia (Philippines), et al.* (Resolution), G.R. No. 209271, July 5, 2016 [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
>
> 2 J. Leonen, Concurring in Opinion in *International Service for the Aquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications, Inc. v. Greenpeace Southeast Asia (Philippines), et al.,* G.R. No. 209271, December 8, 2015
>
> <http://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/pdf/web/viewer.html?file=/jurisprudence/20 l 5/december20 I 5/209271\_leonen.pdf> [Per J. Villarama, Jr., En Banc].
>
> 3 *International Service for the Aquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications, Inc. v. Greenpeace Southeast Asia (Philippines), et al.,* G.R. No. 209271, December 8, 2015 <http:/ /sc.judiciary.gov.ph/pdf/web/viewer.html?file=/jurisprudence/2015/december2015/209271 \_leonen.pdf> [Per J. Villarama, Jr., En Banc].
>
> 4 *International Service for the Aquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications, Inc. v. Greenpeace Southeast Asia (Philippines), et al.* (Resolution), G.R. No. 209271, July 5, 2016, p. 9 [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
>
>
>
