# GR-142299

**BICOLANDIA DRUG CORP. VS. COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL. REVENUE**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: BICOLANDIA DRUG CORP. VS. COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL. REVENUE
- **Ponente**: Azcuna, J.
- **Division**: SECOND DIVISION
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2006/jun2006/gr_142299_2006.html)

---

> SECOND DIVISION
>
> **G.R. No. 142299             June 22, 2006**
>
> BICOLANDIA DRUG CORPORATION (FORMERLY ELMAS DRUG COPRORATION), Petitioner,
>
> vs.
> **COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE,** Respondent.
>
> D E C I S I O N
>
> **AZCUNA, *J.:***
>
> This is a petition for review1 by Bicolandia Drug Corporation, formerly known as Elmas Drug Corporation, seeking the nullification of the Decision and Resolution of the Court of Appeals, dated October 19, 1999 and February 18, 2000, respectively, in CA-G.R SP No. 49946 entitled "Commissioner of Internal Revenue v. Elmas Drug Corporation."
>
> The controversy primarily involves the proper interpretation of the term "cost" in Section 4 of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 7432, otherwise known as "An Act to Maximize the Contribution of Senior Citizens to Nation Building, Grant Benefits and Special Privileges and for Other Purposes."
>
> The facts2 of the case are as follows:
>
> Petitioner Bicolandia Drug Corporation is a domestic corporation principally engaged in the retail of pharmaceutical products. Petitioner has a drugstore located in Naga City under the name and business style of "Mercury Drug."
>
> Pursuant to the provisions of R.A. No. 7432, entitled "An Act to Maximize the Contribution of Senior Citizens to Nation Building, Grant Benefits and Special Privileges and for Other Purposes," also known as the "Senior Citizens Act," and Revenue Regulations No. 2-94, petitioner granted to qualified senior citizens a 20% sales discount on their purchase of medicines covering the period from July 19, 1993 to December 31, 1994.
>
> When petitioner filed its corresponding corporate annual income tax returns for taxable years 1993 and 1994, it claimed as a deduction from its gross income the respective amounts of P80,330 and P515,000 representing the 20% sales discount it granted to senior citizens.
>
> On March 28, 1995, however, alleging error in the computation and claiming that the aforementioned 20% sales discount should have been treated as a tax credit pursuant to R.A. No. 7432 instead of a deduction from gross income, petitioner filed a claim for refund or credit of overpaid income tax for 1993 and 1994, amounting to P52,215 and P334,750, respectively. Petitioner computed the overpayment as follows:
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | Income tax benefit of tax credit | 100% |
> | Income tax benefit of tax deduction | 35% |
> | Differential | 65% |
>
> For 1993
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | 20% discount granted in 1993 | P80,330 |
> | Multiply by 65% | x 65% |
> | Overpaid corporate income tax | P52,215 |
>
> For 1994
>
> |  |  |
> | --- | --- |
> | 20% discount granted in 1993 | P515,000 |
> | Multiply by 65% | x 65% |
> | Overpaid corporate income tax | P334,750 |
>
> On December 29, 1995, petitioner filed a Petition for Review with the Court of Tax Appeals (CTA) in order to toll the running of the two-year prescriptive period for claiming for a tax refund under Section 230, now Section 229, of the Tax Code.
>
> It contended that Section 4 of R.A. No. 7432 provides in clear and unequivocal language that discounts granted to senior citizens may be claimed as a tax credit. Revenue Regulations No. 2-94, therefore, which is merely an implementing regulation cannot modify, alter or depart from the clear mandate of Section 4 of R.A. No. 7432, and, thus, is null and void for being inconsistent with the very statute it seeks to implement.
>
> The Commissioner of Internal Revenue, on the other hand, maintained that the aforesaid section providing for a 20% sales discount to senior citizens is a misnomer as it runs counter to the solemn duty of the government to collect taxes. The Commissioner likewise pointed out that the provision in question employs the word "may," thereby implying that the availability of the remedy of tax credit is not absolute and mandatory and it does not confer an absolute right on the taxpayer to avail of the tax credit scheme if he so chooses. The Commissioner further stated that in statutory construction, the contemporaneous construction of a statute by executive officers of the government whose duty is to execute it is entitled to great respect and should ordinarily control in its interpretation.
>
> Thus, addressing the matter of the proper construction of Section 4(a) of R.A. No. 7432 regarding the treatment of the 20% sales discount given to senior citizens on their medicine purchases, the CTA ruled on the issue of whether or not the discount should be deductible from gross sales of value-added tax or other percentage tax purposes as prescribed under Revenue Regulations No. 2-94 or as a tax credit deductible from the tax due.
>
> In its Decision, dated August 27, 1998, the CTA declared that:
>
> "x x x
>
> Revenue Regulations No. 2-94 gave a new meaning to the phrase "tax credit," interpreting it to mean that the 20% discount granted to qualified senior citizens is an amount deductible from the establishment’s gross sales, which is completely contradictory to the literal or widely accepted meaning of the said phrase, as an amount subtracted from an individual’s or entity’s tax liability to arrive at the total tax liability (Black’s Law Dictionary).
>
> In view of such apparent discrepancy in the interpretation of the term "tax credit", the provisions of the law under R.A. 7432 should prevail over the subordinate regulation issued by the respondent under Revenue Regulation No. 2-94. x x x
>
> Having settled the legal issue involved in the case at bar, We are now tasked to resolve the factual issues of whether or not petitioner is entitled to the claim for refund of its overpaid income taxes for the years 1993 and 1994 based on the evidence at hand.
>
> Contrary to the findings of the independent CPA, aside from the unverifiable 20% sales discounts in the amount of P18,653.70 (Exh. R-3), the Court noted some material discrepancies. Not all the details listed in the 1994 "Summary of Sales and Discounts Given to Senior Citizens" correspond with the cash slips presented. There are various sales discounts granted which were not properly computed and there were also some cash slips left unsigned by the buyers.
>
> x x x
>
> After a careful scrutiny of the documents presented, the Court, allows only the amount of sales discounts duly supported by the pre-marked cash slips x x x.
>
> Hence, only the above amounts which are properly documented can be used as base in computing for the *cost of 20% discount as tax credit.* The overpaid income tax therefore is computed as follows: 3
>
> |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | For 1993 | | | |
> | Net Sales | | | P31,080,508.00 |
> | Add: | 20% Discount to Senior Citizens | | 80,330.00 |
> | Gross Sales | | | P31,160,838.00 |
> | Less: | Cost of Sales | | |
> |  | Merchandise Inventory, beg. | P 4,226,588.00 |
> |  | Add Purchases | 29,234,361.00 |
> |  | Total Goods available for Sale | P33,460,947.00 |
> | Less: | Merchandise Inventory, End | P 4,875.944.00 | P28,585,003.00 |
> | Gross Income | | | P 2,575,835.00 |
> | Less: | Operating Expenses | | 1,706,491.00 |
> | Net Operating Income | | | P 869,344.00 |
> | Add: | Miscellaneous Income | | 72,680.00 |
> | Net Income | | | P 942,024.00 |
> | Less: | Interest Income Subject to Final Tax | | 21,140.00 |
> | Net Taxable Income | | | P 920,884.00 |
> | Tax Due (P920,884 x 35%) | | | P 322,309.40 |
> | Less: | 1) Tax Credit (Cost of 20% Discount)  [(28,585,003.00/31,160,838.00)  x 80,330.34] | P 73,690.03 |  |
> |  | 2) Income Tax Payment for the Year | 294,194.00 | P 367,884.03 |
>  AMOUNT REFUNDABLE | | | **P 45,574.63** |
