# GR-244413

**NURULLAJE SAYRE Y MALAMPAD @ "INOL", PETITIONER, VS. HON. DAX GONZAGA XENOS, IN HIS CAPACITY AS THE PRESIDING JUDGE OF REGIONAL TRIAL COURT OF PANABO CITY, DAVAO DEL NORTE, BRANCH 34; HON. MENARDO I. GUEVARRA, SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; AND PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, RESPONDENTS**

## Metadata

- **Case Title**: NURULLAJE SAYRE Y MALAMPAD @ "INOL", PETITIONER, VS. HON. DAX GONZAGA XENOS, IN HIS CAPACITY AS THE PRESIDING JUDGE OF REGIONAL TRIAL COURT OF PANABO CITY, DAVAO DEL NORTE, BRANCH 34; HON. MENARDO I. GUEVARRA, SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; AND PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, RESPONDENTS
- **Ponente**: Carandang, J.
- **Division**: EN BANC
- **Type**: Decision
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/judjuris/juri2020/feb2020/gr_244413_2020.html)

---

> **G.R. No. 244413, February 18, 2020,**
>
> ♦ Decision, Carandang, [J]
>
> ♦ Concurring Opinion, Leonen, [J]
>
> ♦ Dissenting Opinion, Caguioa, [J]
>
> ♦ Concurring Opinion, Lazaro-Javier, [J]
>
> ♦ Concurring Opinion, Zalameda, [J]
>
> ♦ Concurring Opinion, Lopez, [J]
>
> **EN BANC**
>
> **[ G.R. Nos. 244413 & 244415-16, February 18, 2020 ]**
>
> **NURULLAJE SAYRE Y MALAMPAD @ "INOL", PETITIONER, VS. HON. DAX GONZAGA XENOS, IN HIS CAPACITY AS THE PRESIDING JUDGE OF REGIONAL TRIAL COURT OF PANABO CITY, DAVAO DEL NORTE, BRANCH 34; HON. MENARDO I. GUEVARRA, SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; AND PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES, RESPONDENTS.**
>
> **D E C I S I O N**
>
> **CARANDANG, *J.:***
>
> This is a Petition for Certiorari and Prohibition1 under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court, assailing the Order2 dated December 6, 2018 of public respondent Hon. Dax Gonzaga Xenos (Presiding Judge Xenos), Presiding Judge of the Regional Trial Court (RTC) of Panabo City, Davao del Norte, Branch 34, in Crim. Case Nos. CRC 416-2017, 417-2017, and 418-2017, the dispositive portion of which reads:
>
> > **WHEREFORE**, the Motion to Plea Bargain is **DENIED**. Set the pretrial to 31 January 2018 [sic] at 1:00 p.m.
> >
> > **SO ORDERED.**3 (Italics and underscoring in the original.)
>
> In an Order4 dated January 23, 2019, the RTC denied the Motion for Reconsideration5 of Nurullaje Sayre y Malampad @ "Inol" (Sayre).
>
> **The Antecedents**
>
> Sayre was charged with violation of Sections 5, 11, and 12, Article II of Republic Act No. (R.A.) 9165,6 in three separate Information,7 which respectively read as follows:
>
> CRIMINAL CASE NO. CRC 416-2017
>
> That on or about 09 June 2017, within the City of Panabo, Davao del Norte, Philippines and within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the above-named accused, without being authorized by law, did then and there, willfully, unlawfully and willingly traded, delivered and sold zero point one zero two nine (0.1029) grams of Methylamphetamine Hydrochloride (Shabu) which is a dangerous drug, contained in a sachet marked as JSC-BB to PO2 Jefferjun Cabantuan who acted as poseur buyer in a legitimate buy-bust operation, and received from said poseur buyer marked money consisting of one thousand peso (P1,000.00) bill bearing serial number X114893 with the initials JSC on the forehead of Vicente Lim.
>
> CONTRARY TO LAW.8
>
> CRIMINAL CASE NO. CRC 417-2017
>
> That on or about 09 June 2017 within the City of Panabo, Davao del Norte, Philippines and within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the above-named accused, without being authorized by law, did then and there, willfully, unlawfully, willingly[,] knowingly had in his possession, control and custody of Methylamphetamine Hydrochloride (Shabu), a dangerous drug, contained in four (4) separate heat sealed transparent [sic] cellophane with their respective markings:
>
> |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | Marking | Weight | |
> | JSC-P1 | 0.087 | zero point zero eight seven zero |
> | JSC-P2 | 0.6543 | zero point six five four three |
> | JSC-P3 | 0.0545 | zero point zero five four five |
> | JSC-P4 | 0.0531 | zero point zero [five] three one |
>
> CONTRARY TO LAW.9
>
> CRIMINAL CASE NO. CRC 418-2017
>
> That on or about 09 June 2017, within the City of Panabo, Davao del Norte, Philippines and within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the above-named accused, without being authorized by law, did then and there, willfully, unlawfully, willingly[,] knowingly had in his possession, control and custody, one (1) tooter, an equipment, instrument, apparatus and paraphernalia fit or intended for smoking, consuming, administering, injecting, ingesting or introducing dangerous drugs into the body.
>
> CONTRARY TO LAW.10
>
> On November 9, 2017, Sayre filed a Proposal for Plea Bargaining11 and manifested as follows:
>
> Today, he wanted to plea bargain Section 5 and 11 to a lesser offense under Section 12, which carries with [it] a penalty of imprisonment of six (6) months and 1 day to four (4) years. Moreover, for Section 12, penalty of compulsory 6-month rehabilitation. These proposals are without prejudice however to the guidelines on plea bargaining yet to be released by the Supreme Court, whichever is most favorable and beneficial to the accused; x x x12
>
> Pursuant to Office of the Court Administrator (OCA) Circular No. 90-2018, adopting the Court En Banc Resolution dated April 10, 2018 in Administrative Matter (A.M.) No. 18-03-16-SC (Adoption of the Plea Bargaining Framework in Drug Cases), Sayre filed a Motion for Approval of Plea-Bargaining Proposal with Modification.13 Sayre proposed the following:
>
> x x x x
>
> 4. That in the said Plea-Bargaining Framework for Drug Cases, the offense under Section 5 with quantity of *shabu* from 0.1 to 0.99 grams the same can be plea bargain under Section 12 of RA 9165 fro:m Life Imprisonment to 6 months and 1 day to 4 years;
>
> 5. That also, the offense under Section 11 par. 3 with quantity of *shabu* from .01 gram to 4.99 grams the same can be plea bargain under Section 12 of RA 9165 from 12 years and 1 day to 20 years to 6 months and 1 day to 4 years;
>
> 6. That finally, the offense under Section 12 can now be plea bargain under Section 15 from 6 months and 1 day to 4 years to: (1) 6 months treatment and rehabilitation (if accused admits drug use, or denies drug use but found positive after drug dependency test); or (b) Undergo counselling program at rehabilitation center (if accused is found negative for drug use/dependency);
>
> 7. That on September 18, 2018, Dra. Rachel Jan Inojada submitted her Drug Dependency Test (DDT) on accused Sayre and found him negative on *shabu*;
>
> 8. That in view thereof, accused Sayre is praying for the approval of his Plea-Bargaining Proposal for the offense under Sections 5 and 11 of RA 9165 to Section 12 with a penalty of 6 months and 1 day to 4 years; and
>
> 9. That however, for the offense under Section 12, the plea bargaining under Section 15 be approved with a modified penalty of "Undergoing counselling at the rehabilitation center" for being negative on drug use.14 (Italics and underscoring in the original; citations omitted)
>
> Sayre proposed that he be allowed to file an Application for Probation for the penalty of 6 months and 1 day to 4 years considering that the maximum penalty therein is less than 6 years and that he be released from the custody of the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology City Jail upon its approval.15 The proposal of Sayre is summarized as follows:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | Criminal Case No. | OFFENSE CHARGED | | PLEA BARGAIN PROPOSED BY SAYRE PURSUANT TO ADMINISTRATIVE MATTER NO. 18-03-16-SC | |
> |  | SECTION | PENALTY | SECTION | PENALTY |
> | CRC 416-2017 | Sec. 5 Illegal Sale of Dangerous Drugs (0.1029 gram of *shabu*) | Life Imprisonment [to death] and a fine ranging from P500,000.00 to P10,000,000.00 (0.01-0.99 gram of *shabu*) | Sec. 12 Possession of Paraphernalia for dangerous drugs | Imprisonment of 6 months and 1 day to 4 years |
> | CRC 417-2017 | Sec. 11 Illegal Possession of Dangerous Drugs (0.0870 gram, 0.6543 gram, 0.0545 gram, and 0.0531 gram of *shabu*) | 12 years and 1 day to 20 years and a fine ranging from P300,000.00-P400,000.00 (0.01-4.99 gram of *shabu*) | Sec. 12 Possession of Paraphernalia for Dangerous Drugs | Imprisonment of 6 months and 1 day to 4 years |
> | CRC 418-2017 | Sec. 12 Possession of Paraphernalia for Dangerous Drugs | 6 months and 1 day to 4 years and a fine ranging from P10,000.00 to P50,000.00 | Sec. 15 Use of Dangerous Drugs | Penalty of Compulsory 6-month Rehabilitation |
>
> City Prosecutor Jennifer B. Namoc-Yasol (City Prosecutor Namoc­-Yasol) filed a Comment and Counter-Proposal16 in accordance with Department of Justice (DOJ) Circular No. 27 dated June 26, 2018, otherwise known as the "Amended Guidelines on Plea Bargaining for Republic Act No. 9165,"17 summarized as follows:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | Criminal Case No. | OFFENSE CHARGED | | COUNTER-PROPOSAL BY THE PROSECUTION PURSUANT TO DOJ CIRCULAR NO. 27 | |
> | SECTION | PENALTY | SECTION | PENALTY |
> | CRC 416-2017 | Sec. 5 Illegal Sale of Dangerous Drugs (0.1029 gram of *shabu*) | Life Imprisonment and a fine ranging from P500,000.00 to P10,000,000.00 (0.01-0.99 gram of *shabu*) | Section 11 paragraph 3 Illegal Possession of Dangerous Drugs | Indeterminate Penalty of 12 years and 1 day to 14 years and 8 months and a fine of P300,00018 |
> | CRC 417-2017 | Sec. 11 Illegal Possession of Dangerous Drugs (0.0870 gram, 0.6543 gram, 0.0545 gram, and 0.0531 gram of *shabu*) | 12 years and 1 day to 20 years and a fine ranging from P300,000.00-P400,000.00 (0.01-4.99 gram of *shabu*) | Sec. 12 Possession of Paraphernalia for Dangerous Drugs | Imprisonment Penalty of 6 months and 1 day to 4 years and a fine of P25,000.0019 |
> | CRC 418-2017 | Sec. 12 Possession of Paraphernalia for Dangerous Drugs | 6 months and 1 day to 4 years and a fine ranging from P10,000.00 to P50,000.00 | Plead to the crime as charged | Indeterminate Penalty of 6 months and 1 day to 4 years and a fine of P25,000.00 |
