Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

**SECOND PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session
Proposed PB No. **282**

Introduced by:
**MP ABDULLAH B. HASHIM**

Co-Authors:
**MP SUSANA S. ANAYATIN, MP NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN, MP MUDJIB C. ABU, MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN, MP FAIZAL G. KARON, MP ALI O. SALIK, MP ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG, MP ALI B. SOLAIMAN, MP ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, MP IBRAHIM D. ALI, MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MP LANANG T. JR., MP RAMON A. PIANG, MP ALI MONTAHA D. BABAO, MP DENMARTIN A. KAHALAN, MP DIAMILA D. RAMOS, MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO, MP SAID M. SHIEK, MP TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT, MP ABDULLAH E. GAYAK, MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG, MP HUSSEIN P. MUNOZ, MP EDDIE M. ALIH, MP BAI MALEHA B. CANDAO, MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN, MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, MP MARJANIE S. MIMBANTAS, MP AIDA M. SILONGAN**

**AN ACT GRANTING GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO A THIRTY (30) CALENDAR DAYS PAID LEAVE TO PERFORM PILGRIMAGE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR**

*Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in Parliament assembled:*

**SECTION 1. Short Title.** – This Act shall be known as the “*Pilgrimage Leave Act of 2024*”.

**SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy.** – It is the policy of the Bangsamoro Government to exercise its powers for the promotion of the general welfare of its people. The Bangsamoro government realizes the role of a strong and contented workforce in achieving a developed Bangsamoro region.

**SEC. 3. Definition of Terms.** – For the purpose of this Act, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

a. Pilgrimage – refers to the act of a person to visit a place of religious or spiritual importance to perform acts of worship or spiritual journey;

b. Pilgrimage Leave – refers to the thirty (30) calendar days one-time paid leave granted to Bangsamoro officials and employees to perform pilgrimage.

**SEC. 4. Qualifications** – All officials and employees of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM), who have served the Bangsamoro government for an aggregate period of two (2) years is qualified to apply for the Pilgrimage leave. The Pilgrimage Leave can only be availed once during the lifetime of the employee regardless of the office or institution in the Bangsamoro Region he/she is employed at the time of application.

**SEC. 5. Approval** – The Chief Minister, upon the favorable recommendation of the respective heads of offices, shall have the authority to approve any application for Pilgrimage Leave based on the qualifications set in this Act.

In the case of the Bangsamoro Parliament, the Parliament Speaker shall be the approving authority of Pilgrimage Leave applications of officials and employees of the Bangsamoro Parliament.

For officials and employees of local government units (LGUs), all Pilgrimage Leave applications shall be favorably recommended by their respective Local Chief Executives having authority over the applicant and shall recommend the same to the Chief Minister for approval.

The application for Pilgrimage Leave shall be submitted to the Office of the Chief Minister through the Ministry of the Interior and Local Government (MILG).

In all cases, the respective heads of offices may refuse to recommend the approval of any application for Pilgrimage Leave if such will seriously hamper the operations of the office or institution.

**SEC. 6. Records Keeping** - The Office of the Chief Minister shall keep a record of all the officials and employees, including the LGUs, in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao who availed the Pilgrimage leave. All approved Pilgrimage Leave shall be forwarded to the Office of the Chief Minister for recording.

**SEC. 7. Post-leave Report** – Any employee who availed the Pilgrimage leave shall be required to submit a written report regarding the details of the pilgrimage he/she performed to the Office of the Chief Minister or to the Office of the Parliament Speaker, in case of Bangsamoro Parliament officials and employees, through their respective offices within thirty (30) days after returning to work.

**SEC. 8. Sanctions and Penalties** – Any employee who deliberately did not perform pilgrimage despite availing of the Pilgrimage leave shall be subject to administrative sanctions and penalties.

**SEC. 9. Appropriations.** – The amount necessary to implement the provisions of this Act shall be included in the budget of the Office of the Chief Minister. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual Bangsamoro Appropriations Act.

**SEC. 10. Implementing Agency.** – Within ninety (90) days from the approval of this Act, the Office of the Chief Minister and Civil Service Commission for BARMM shall jointly promulgate the Implementing Rules and Regulations of this Act to ensure the faithful and just execution of this regional law.

**SEC. 11. Repealing Clause.** – All regional laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations, other issuances, or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

**SEC. 12. Separability Clause.** – If any provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other parts or provisions not affected thereby shall continue to remain in full force and effect.

**SEC. 13. Effectivity.** - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in at least one (1) regional newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

AUTHOR:
(Sgd.)
**ABDULLAH B. HASHIM**
Member of Parliament

Certified Correct:
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:
**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker

