# Executive Order No. 145

**DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE SAN ISIDRO PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)**

## Metadata

- **EO Number**: 145
- **Source**: [lawphil.net](https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/eo2013/eo_145_2013.html)

---

> **MALACAÑAN PALACE**
> MANILA
>
> **BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES**
>
> EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 145
>
> DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE SAN ISIDRO PORT ZONE AND PLACING IT UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)
>
> WHEREAS, PPA is mandated to establish, develop, regulate, manage and operate a rationalized national port system in support of trade and national development;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the delineation and declaration of port zones under PPA aims to redirect and reorganize port administration for the full development of port districts;
>
> **WHEREAS,** the Port of San Isidro in San Isidro, Northern Samar is one of the major and busiest ports in the country; and
>
> **WHEREAS,** there is a need to define the Port zone of San Isidro for the planning and development of necessary port facilities to support the demands of shipping trade within the region.
>
> **NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III,** President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:
>
> **SECTION 1.** *Port of San Isidro.* The territorial jurisdiction of the Port of San Isidro situated in the Municipality of San Isidro, Province of Northern Samar, is hereby delineated and established, particularly described as follows:
>
> Beginning at a point marked 1 on the plan, being N. 84 deg. 50? W., 174.08 m. from BLLM No. 16, San Isidro, Northern Samar, thence:
>
> |  |  |  |  |  |  |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
> | S. | 57 deg. | 00' | W., | 60.00 m. | to point 2; |
> | S. | 09 deg. | 00' | W., | 45.00 m. | to point 3; |
> | S. | 57 deg. | 00' | W., | 50.00 m. | to point 4; |
> | DUE WEST | | | | 30.00 m. | to point 5; |
> | S. | 57 deg. | 00' | W., | 500.00 m. | to point 6; |
> | N. | 33 deg. | 00' | W., | 500.00 m. | to point 7; |
> | N. | 55 deg. | 57' | E., | 873.44 m. | to point 8; |
> 1âwphi1| S. | 42 deg. | 15' | E., | 308.83 m. | to point 9; |
> | S. | 07 deg. | 46' | W., | 213.65 m. | to point 10; |
> | S. | 13 deg. | 46' | E., | 68.91 m. | to point 11; |
> | S. | 64 deg. | 00' | E., | 3.05 m. | to point 12; |
> | S. | 56 deg. | 53' | E., | 26.88 m. | to point 13; |
> | S. | 40 deg. | 37' | E., | 3.69 m. | to point 14; |
> | S. | 27 deg. | 43' | E., | 0.94 m. | to point 15; |
> | S. | 58 deg. | 21' | E., | 15.65 m. | to point 16; |
> | S. | 66 deg. | 38' | E., | 2.68 m. | to point 17; |
> | S. | 73 deg. | 21' | E., | 6.16 m. | to point 18; |
> | S. | 86 deg. | 02' | E., | 2.75 m. | to point 19; |
> | N. | 89 deg. | 27' | E., | 5.94 m. | to point 20; |
> | N. | 76 deg. | 14' | E., | 5.90 m. | to point 21; |
> | S. | 40 deg. | 48' | W., | 29.56 m. | to point 22; |
> | S. | 21 deg. | 23' | W., | 6.50 m. | to point 23; |
> | S. | 52 deg. | 28' | W., | 18.03 m. | to point 24; |
> | S. | 57 deg. | 26' | W., | 18.02 m. | to point 25; |
> | S. | 67 deg. | 18' | W., | 33.39 m. | to point 26; |
> | S. | 72 deg. | 58' | W., | 26.26 m. | to point 27; |
> | N. | 45 deg. | 36' | W., | 22.46 m. | to point 28; |
> | N. | 33 deg. | 04' | E., | 2.75 m. | to point 29; |
> | N. | 50 deg. | 54' | W., | 20.84 m. | to point 30; |
> | N. | 22 deg. | 58' | E., | 23.23 m. | to point 31; |
> | N. | 56 deg. | 29' | W., | 40.00 m. | to point of beginning; |
>
> Containing an area of FOUR HUNDRED FIFTY-ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED FORTY-NINE (451,749) SQUARE METERS, more or less.1âwphi1
>
> **SECTION 2.** *PPA Jurisdiction.* The San Isidro Port zone, as delineated, is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the PPA, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the government, implement a program for the proper zoning, planning, development and utilization of the port.
>
> **SECTION 3.** *Repeal.* All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
>
> **SECTION 4.** *Separability.* If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.
>
> **SECTION 5.** *Effectivity.* This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
>
> DONE, in the City of Manila, this 5th day of November, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Thirteen.
>
> (Sgd.) **BENIGNO S. AQUINO III**
>
> By the President:
>
> (Sgd.) **PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR.**
> Executive Secretary
>
>
>
