Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 107**

Introduced by:
**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA**

Co-Authors:
**MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, MPSA; MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Rasul E. Ismael; MP Khalid Ma-Amor Hadji Abdullah; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; and MP Bassir D. Utto.**

**RESOLUTION**

**REQUESTING THE OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE (OCD) AND THE OFFICE OF THE CHIEF MINISTER (OCM) TO JOINTLY REVIEW THE HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND DISASTER RESPONSE (HADR) IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION GIVEN THE DIRECTIVE OF THE PRESIDENT TO SEEK BETTER COORDINATION BETWEEN THE BANGSAMORO GOVERNMENT AND THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS DURING EMERGENCIES**

WHEREAS, Section 8, Article IX of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11054 or the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL), states that the Bangsamoro Government shall provide, maintain, and ensure the delivery of basic and responsive health programs, quality education, appropriate services, livelihood opportunities, affordable and progressive housing projects, power and electricity, and water to inhabitants of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall maintain appropriate disaster-preparedness units for immediate and effective relief services to victims of natural and man-made calamities. It shall also ensure the rehabilitation of calamity-affected areas.

WHEREAS, *Tropical Storm Nalgae*, known in the Philippines as Severe Tropical Storm *Paeng*, hit the Philippines on October 26-29, 2022;

WHEREAS, the heavy rains brought about by the storm resulted to massive flooding and landslides that caused the loss of lives and the destruction to property of thousands of Filipinos across multiple regions in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) issued a Memorandum on October 26, directing its members, including the Bangsamoro Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (BDRRMC), to activate the Bravo Emergency Preparedness and Response (EPR) protocol immediately. The region’s DRRM was directed to send warnings and advisories, and cascade emergency preparedness and response protocols in connection with the then-tropical depression Paeng;¹

WHEREAS, on October 29, 2022, Chief Minister Ahod Balawag Ebrahim declared a state of calamity in the Bangsamoro Region;

WHEREAS, on November 1, 2022, President Ferdinand “Bongbong” R. Marcos had a briefing with the officials of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) in Datu Odin Sinsuat, Maguindanao del Norte, in response to the storm. The President raised the need for the improved coordination between the BARMM and local government units (LGUs), particularly in times of disaster and emergency;²

WHEREAS, the President said during the briefing, “*I notice na yung BARMM saka yung LGU, wala kayong joint operation. You have to have joint operation to maximize all of your assets. There is only so much, kaya kailangan naka-focus. The different areas, siyempre mayroong lugar mas maraming tao ang BARMM, mayroong lugar mas maraming tao ang LGU, so i-join ninyo ang forces ninyo para ma-maximize natin. Kailangan gandahan natin yung coordination.*”

WHEREAS, the President further highlighted the vital need of a better response in order to address the needs of those affected by the calamity while at the same time reducing the impacts of disasters;

WHEREAS, on November 2, 2022, President Ferdinand R. Marcos issued Proclamation No. 84 placing Region IV-A (CALABARZON), the Bicol Region, Western Visayas, and the BARMM under a state of calamity for six months, in response to the devastation brought by Severe Tropical Storm *Paeng*;³

WHEREAS, under the same Proclamation, all concerned government departments and agencies were directed to continue the implementation of rescue, relief, and rehabilitation measures in areas affected by the storm;

WHEREAS, based on the data released by BDRRMC on Nov. 4, 2022, *Paeng* left the Bangsamoro region with over 570,285 individuals affected, including 53 death casualties, 12 missing, and 38 injured. A total of 371 houses were damaged and 480 were partially damaged. Moreover, BARMM’s infrastructure and agriculture logged an estimated cost of damages amounting to Php585,602,426.33;⁴

WHEREAS, the NDRRMC on November 8, 2022, reported that the death toll from the Severe Tropical Storm *Paeng* stands at 158. The NDRRMC reported 123 confirmed fatalities, 142 injured, and 34 missing. Significantly, the BARMM has the most number of deaths with 63 fatalities, followed by CALABARZON with 34, and Western Visayas with 33;⁵

WHEREAS, the Office of Civil Defense (OCD) is the implementing arm of the NDRRMC. Its primary mission is administering a comprehensive national civil defense and disaster risk reduction and management program by providing leadership in the continuous development of strategic and systematic approaches as well as measures to reduce the vulnerabilities and risks to hazards and manage the consequences of disasters;

WHEREAS, Section 9, Title III of the Bangsamoro Administrative Code states that the Chief Minister shall chair the BDRRMC;

WHEREAS, Section 10 of the same law provides for the function of the BDRRMC, in which it shall coordinate, integrate, supervise and evaluate the activities of the Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Councils (LDRRMCs) in the BARMM. It shall also be responsible in ensuring disaster-sensitive regional development plans, and in case of emergencies, shall convene the different regional line agencies and concerned institutions and authorities;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 12 signed by Chief Minister Ebrahim on July 29, 2019 established the BARMM Rapid Emergency Action on Disaster Incidence (BARMM-READi) as a disaster risk reduction management operation center run by the Ministry of Interior and Local Government (MILG). The BARMM-READi shall coordinate with the OCD in monitoring and responding to displacements that result from human-induced and natural calamities within the territorial jurisdiction of the region;

WHEREAS, humanitarian assistance is of paramount importance for the victims of natural disasters and other emergencies. This includes the supply of food and medicines and the provision of shelter and health care. Access to these basic needs is very essential in order to maintain the dignity of those affected by the disaster;

WHEREAS, the Bangsamoro Government has the primary responsibility in the initiation, organization, and coordination of humanitarian assistance and disaster response within the Bangsamoro Region. This includes the facilitating of actions and solutions in mitigating the consequences of the natural disasters;

WHEREAS, based on R. A. No. 10121 or the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010, the LGUs are the first responders in the occurrence of natural and man-made calamities;

WHEREAS, better coordination, communication, and overall synergy between the Bangsamoro Government and the LGUs is vital in responding to emergencies. This can help create better strategies in establishing immediate plans to help the victims recover more expediently and efficiently;

WHEREAS, the HADR in the Bangsamoro Region must be assessed and reviewed in order to look into the challenges of disaster response and management in the Region. This way, the Bangsamoro Government can adopt measures and/or formulate a better system in responding during disasters;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED,** by the BTA Parliament, to pass and approve this Resolution requesting the OCD and the OCM to jointly review the Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Response (HADR) in Bangsamoro Autonomous Region given the directive of the President to seek better coordination between the Bangsamoro Government and the local government units during emergencies.

**RESOLVED FINALLY,** that copy of this Resolution be furnished to the Office of Civil Defense central office and to the Office of the Chief Minister, for information and appropriate action.

Adopted,

(Sgd.)
**ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
