Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**First Regular Session**

**Proposed Resolution No. 170**

**Introduced by:**

**Atty. John Anthony “Jet” L. Lim, Al-Haj**
**Matarul M. Estino**
**Atty. Jose I. Lorena**
**Atty. Omar Yasser C. Sema**
**Atty. Paisalin P. Tago**
**Atty. Nabil A. Tan**

**A RESOLUTION CREATING SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON FILIPINO DEPORTEES OR “HALAW”**

**WHEREAS**, *Halaw* is a Malayo word which literally means “to cast out, to eject, or to throw away”, which term is used to refer to Filipino deported from Malaysia due to lack of legal documents such as passports;

**WHEREAS**, records bear that from September to November 2022 alone, around Three Thousand Fifteen (3,015) Filipinos were deported from Sabah, Malaysia to the Philippines, and most of them received mostly in the island Province of Tawi-Tawi, where the *Halaws* find kinships;

**WHEREAS**, the Tawi-Tawi is the southernmost province of the Philippines, and the most proximate location to Sabah, Malaysia being reachable by sea-travel in only a matter of hour;

**WHEREAS**, Tawau, Lahad Datu, Semporna and Sandakan are among the common destinations for Filipinos from Tawi-Tawi seeking job and business opportunities;

**WHEREAS**, prior to their deportations, HALAWS are detained by Malaysian authorities, which may well negatively affect their physical, psychological, economic and overall well-beings;

**WHEREAS**, there is a clear and urgent necessity for the creation of a special Committee on Filipino Deportees or “Halaw” in the Parliament if only to come up with regional interventions that will address the problem of deportation of Filipinos and the reintegration of Halaws into mainstream society, among others;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, that the Bangsamoro Parliament create a Special Committee on Filipino Deportees or “Halaws” pursuant to Section 2, Rule VII of the Parliamentary Rules, Procedures, and Practices of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority.

Adopted, ___________.

**AUTHORS:**

(Signed)
**Atty. John Anthony “Jet” L. Lim, Al-haj**

**Matarul M. Estino**

**Atty. Jose I. Lorena**

(Signed)
**Atty. Omar Yasser C. Sema**

(Signed)
**Atty. Paisalin P. Tago**

**Atty. Nabil A. Tan**

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
