Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

**EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION**

**RESOLUTION NO. 119**

Introduced by:

MP ENGR. AIDA M. SILONGAN
MP ATTY. MARY ANN M. ARNADO
MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL
MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL
MP EDDIE M. ALIH

Co-Authors:

MP. MOHAGHER M. IQBAL, MP. TAWAKAL MIDTIMBANG, MP. ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN, MP IBRAHIM D. ALI, MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MP ATTY. ANNA TARHATA S. BASMAN, MP ATTY. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA ALBA, MP RAMON A. PIANG, MP ATTY. UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP MUDJIB C. ABU, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP MATARUL M. ESTINO, and MP ATTY. LANANG ALI, JR.

**A RESOLUTION EXPRESSING SINCERE APPRECIATION AND GRATITUDE TO SENATOR RISA HONTIVEROS FOR PROVIDING DISASTER RELIEF AND ASSISTANCE TO THE PEOPLE OF THE BANGSAMORO WHO SUFFERED CATASTROPHIC DAMAGE CAUSED BY SEVERE TROPICAL STORM PAENG**

**WHEREAS**, on October 26, 2022, a severe tropical storm known as Paeng (international name: Nalgae) hit the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM), resulting in significant destruction, loss of life, and damage to agriculture and critical infrastructure due to flooding, sea surge, and landslides.

**WHEREAS**, according to the Bangsamoro Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (BDRRMC), Severe Tropical Storm Paeng affected at least 570,285 individuals in the region, with 53 fatalities, 12 missing persons, and 38 injured persons.

**WHEREAS**, Severe Tropical Storm Paeng damaged 371 houses and partially damaged 480 others in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM). The storm also caused significant damage to infrastructure and agriculture, with estimated losses of around PHP 585,602,426.33;

**WHEREAS**, on 29 October 2022, Bangsamoro Chief Minister Ahod Ebrahim declared a state of calamity in the Bangsamoro Region;

**WHEREAS**, due to the complete devastation caused by Severe Tropical Storm Paeng, many people were left without access to basic supplies, including food, clean drinking water, and medical equipment. This necessitated urgent assistance and response efforts, including the procurement, transportation, and distribution of emergency relief commodities for the affected population.;

**WHEREAS**, Senator Risa Hontiveros, through her Office, distributed food packs and other relief goods, as part of her disaster relief initiative to the communities and victims affected by Severe Tropical Storm Paeng;

**WHEREAS**, to alleviate the suffering of the people of the Bangsamoro, the Senator expressed her support and solidarity to the calamity-stricken families.

**WHEREAS**, Senator Risa Hontiveros played a significant role in making sure that basic goods and relief supplies reached the people of the Bangsamoro region who were affected by the disaster; her proactive approach and compassion were instrumental in providing much-needed assistance to those in need;

**NOW THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, the Bangsamoro extends its heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to Senator Risa Hontiveros for her quick response and assistance in the disaster relief efforts.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, that a copy of this foregoing Resolution be furnished to the Office of Senator Risa Hontiveros, for information.

**ADOPTED**, _______________

(Sgd.)
**MP ENGR. AIDA M. SILONGAN**
Author

(Sgd.)
**MP ATTY. MARY ANN M. ARNADO**
Author

(Sgd.)
**MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**
Author

(Sgd.)
**MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL**
Author

(Sgd.)
**MP EDDIE M. ALIH**
Author
