Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

**Proposed Resolution No. 157**

Introduced by: **MP Abdullah E. Gayak, MP Romeo K. Sema & MP Eddie M. Alih**

**A RESOLUTION URGING THE MINISTRY OF BASIC, HIGHER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION – MADARIS EDUCATION TO ESTABLISH A MADRASAH DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM**

**WHEREAS**, Article XIV, Section 1 of the 1987 Constitution provides:

**Section 1.** Education. - The state shall protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality education at all levels, and shall take appropriate steps to make such education accessible to all;

**WHEREAS**, Article IX, Section 18, 3rd paragraph of R.A. 11054 otherwise known as the “Organic Law for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao” (OLBARMM for brevity) states:

**Section 18.** Madaris Educational System, Islamic and Arabic Studies. - The Parliament shall enact legislation to develop and strengthen the Madaris educational system in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

**WHEREAS**, Madrasah Database Management System (MDBS) shall aid to identify the status of the development and improvement of all Madrasah within the BARMM;

**WHEREAS**, the MDBS includes basic information including the list of Madrasah, their students and the Asatidz;

**WHEREAS**, MDBS encourages the non-registered Madrasah to register in MBHTE – Madaris to be included as recipient for the priority assistance and programs of the MBHTE – Madaris Education;

**WHEREAS**, this database would serve as a baseline in conducting research and the Madrasah could not be used as breeding ground for violent extremism;

**WHEREAS**, MBHTE-Madaris, in partnership with the local government units and private organizations, may easily identify and create a program for the improvement and the quality education of the Madrasah;

**NOW, THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to urge the Ministry of Basic Higher and Technical Education – Madaris Education to establish Madrasah Database Management System.

**Adopted**, ________.

**Principal Authors:**

**HON. ABDULLAH E. GAYAK**
Member of Parliament

**HON. ROMEO K. SEMA**
Member of Parliament

**HON. EDDIE M. ALIH**
Member of Parliament
