Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

Parliament Resolution No. **254**

Introduced by
**MPs Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE, Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Nurredha I. Misuari, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Adzfar H. Usman, Hamid U. Malik, Benjamin T. Loong, Atty. Randolph C. Parcasio, and Albakil D. Jikiri**

Co-authored by
**MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Atty. John Anthony L. Lim, Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, Michael E. Midtimbang, Mudjib C. Abu, Mohammad Kelie U. Antao, Dr. Romeo K. Sema, Suwaib L. Oranon, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Mosber E. Alauddin, Denmartin A. Kahalan, Tarhata M. Maglangit, and Diamila D. Ramos**

**RESOLUTION STRONGLY URGING THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION (MOTC), BANGSAMORO BOARD OF INVESTMENTS (BBOI), AND THE MINISTRY OF TRADE, INVESTMENTS, AND TOURISM (MTIT) TO ADDRESS THE CHALLENGES OF TRAVELLING TO AND FROM SULU DUE TO THE LIMITED NUMBER OF PASSENGER SHIPPING VESSELS AND TO ADD ANOTHER ROUTE FROM ZAMBOANGA TO LUUK, SULU AND VICE VERSA TO IMPROVE SEA CONNECTIVITY OF THE ISLAND PROVINCE OF SULU**

**WHEREAS**, Section 3, Article III of Republic Act 11054, otherwise known as the “Bangsamoro Organic Law,” states that the Bangsamoro Government shall, among others, enhance economic prosperity and preserve the comfort and convenience of its inhabitants;

**WHEREAS**, Section 2, Chapter 1, Title XV of the Bangsamoro Administrative Code provides that the Ministry of Transportation and Communication (MOTC) “shall be the primary policy, planning, programming, coordinating, implementing, regulating, and administrative entity of the Bangsamoro Government in the promotion, development, and regulation of dependable and coordinated networks of transportation and communications system as well as fast, safe, efficient and reliable transportation and communications services”;

**WHEREAS**, the island province of Sulu is one of the six (6) provinces of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao and is situated nearly one hundred fifty (150) kilometers from the westernmost port of the Mindanao Island, which is the seaport of Zamboanga City;

**WHEREAS**, previously there were four (4) shipping companies offering sea trips to Sulu, including one (1) Roll-on, Roll-off sea trip, and even a fast craft;

**WHEREAS**, with the tragedy that befell M/V Lady Mary Joy 3 last March 29, 2023, which claimed the lives of 32 people on board, sea travel to Sulu became more difficult since the number of shipping companies servicing the Sulu-Zamboanga route has now been reduced;

**WHEREAS**, another factor that exacerbates the situation is the indefinite cessation of operation by the fast craft vessels previously offering transportation services on the same route;

**WHEREAS**, the inconvenience brought about by the cessation of operations of some of the shipping companies previously servicing Sulu makes travel to the Island province more difficult, with ferry tickets now harder to procure due to the high demand for travel and limited passenger capacity;

**WHEREAS**, in the past weeks, hundreds of passengers have needed to line up as early as 2 am in Jolo port and even in the Zamboanga ticketing outlets just to be able to get a chance to purchase tickets;

**WHEREAS**, even the regional employees of BARMM are experiencing these difficulties where tickets are already unavailable three (3) days before the scheduled trip, and travelers need to wait for several days to be able to go to Jolo or return to Zamboanga;

**WHEREAS**, this large discrepancy in the demand for travel to and from Sulu compared to the available transport has brought in ticket syndicates that take advantage of the situation and make passengers pay as much as 1.5 times the original cost of the ticket;

**WHEREAS**, this situation affects government service delivery as well as the emerging tourism industry in Sulu, which is frequented by local tourists from Western Mindanao;

**WHEREAS**, among the three island provinces, it is only Sulu that suffers from this predicament since its neighboring provinces enjoy multiple daily sea trips to its ports;

**WHEREAS**, the port of Luuk, Sulu, can also be utilized as a port of entry into the province and would bring more economic growth to the second district of Sulu, which is usually accessible only after more than an hour of land travel from the provincial capital of Jolo;

**WHEREAS**, with more sea routes opening to connect the region’s major ports, the province of Sulu should not be left behind in the recent developments in regional connectivity and should be specially assisted by the regional government by attracting private sector investments to address the challenges of travelers to the island province;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED** by the Bangsamoro Parliament, TO STRONGLY URGE THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION (MOTC), BANGSAMORO BOARD OF INVESTMENTS (BBOI), AND THE MINISTRY OF TRADE, INVESTMENTS, AND TOURISM (MTIT) TO ADDRESS THE CHALLENGES OF TRAVELLING TO AND FROM SULU DUE TO THE LIMITED NUMBER OF PASSENGER SHIPPING VESSELS AND TO ADD ANOTHER ROUTE FROM ZAMBOANGA TO LUUK, SULU AND VICE VERSA TO IMPROVE SEA CONNECTIVITY OF THE ISLAND PROVINCE OF SULU.

**ADOPTED**,

Authors:

(Signed)
**HON. MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE**

**HON. MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI**

**HON. MP NURREDHA I. MISUARI**

**HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**

**HON. MP ADZFAR H. USMAN**

**HON. MP HAMID U. MALIK**

**HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG**

**HON. MP ATTY. RANDOLPH C. PARCASIO**

**HON. MP ALBAKIL D. JIKIRI**

Co-authors:

**HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA**

**HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN**

**HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG**

**HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO**

**HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL**

**HON. MP ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM**

**HON. MP JAAFAR APOLLO MIKHAIL L. MATALAM**

**HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**

**HON. MP MUDJIB C. ABU**

**HON. MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO**

**HON. MP DR. ROMEO K. SEMA**

**HON. MP SUWAIB L. ORANON**

**HON. MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO**

**HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN**

**HON. MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN**

**HON. MP DENMARTIN A. KAHALAN**

**HON. MP TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT**

**HON. MP DIAMILA D. RAMOS**

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
