Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

**RESOLUTION NO. 259**

Authored by:
**MP Baileng S. Mantawil**
**MP Engr. Aida Silongan**

Co-Authored by **MPs Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Sha-Elijah Dumama-Alba, Tarhata M. Maglangit, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Khalid M. Hadji Abdullah, Bassir D. Utto, Mudjib Abo, Mohammad Kelie U. Antao, Suwaib L. Oranon, Abdulwahab M. Pak, Ibrahim D. Ali, Abdullah E. Gayak, Said Z. Salendab, Mohammad Shuaib Yacob, Eddie M. Alih, Abdullah B. Hashim, Amroussi A. Macatanong, Marjanie S. Macasalong, Suharto Esmael, Matarul M. Estino, Said M. Shiek, Abdullah G. Macapaar, Hussein P. Munoz, Dan S. Asnawie, Dr. Kadil M. Sinolinding, Jr.**

**RESOLUTION**

**IN AID OF LEGISLATION, URGING THE GOTD TO CONDUCT VARIOUS FORA ON THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11596 OR AN ACT PROHIBITING THE PRACTICE OF CHILD MARRIAGE VIS-À-VIS PD 1083, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE MUSLIM PERSONAL LAWS OF THE PHILIPPINES**

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro region recognizes and upholds the fundamental rights and protections of its constituents, including those related to marriage and family life;

**WHEREAS**, Republic Act (RA) 11596, which prohibits forced marriages, is a welcomed measure in the region, but it also presents certain conflicts with Presidential Decree (PD) 1083, otherwise known as the Muslim Personal Laws of the Philippines, on the age of marriageable couples;

**WHEREAS**, there is a need to clarify these conflicts and identify the appropriate legal issues and concerns to take regarding RA 11596;

**WHEREAS**, the views and opinions of Bangsamoro legal experts on this matter are of utmost importance to determine any issues and concern to be taken by the Bangsamoro Parliament in line with the customs, beliefs, and traditions of its constituents;

**WHEREAS**, holding a forum in aid of legislation will provide an opportunity for the Bangsamoro Government to hear directly from opinions from stakeholders and experts in the field, on their views regarding RA 11596;

**THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED** that the Bangsamoro Government of the Day hold a forum in aid of legislation to discuss the implications of RA 11596 on the customs, beliefs, and traditions of its constituents and the potential conflicts with PD 1083 and other and other stakeholders to share their views and opinions on the legal issues and concerns to take regarding RA 11596, as well as any potential legal steps, recommendations and suggestions to the law to ensure that it is consistent with the customs, beliefs, laws. The forum should also provide an opportunity for Moro lawyers, Shari‘ah counselors, , and traditions of the region.

**BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED** to ensure that the fundamental rights and protections of the Bangsamoro constituents are upheld.

Principal Authors:

(Sgd.)
**MP Baileng S. Mantawil**

**MP Engr. Aida Silongan**

Co-authors:

**MP Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan**
**MP Atty. Sha-Elijah Dumama-Alba**

**MP Tarhata M. Maglangit**
(Sgd.)
**MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang**

**MP Khalid M. Hadji Abdullah**
**MP Bassir D. Utto**

**MP Mudjib C. Abu**
**MP Mohammad Kelie U. Antao**

**MP Suwaib L. Oranon**
**MP Abdulwahab M. Pak**

**MP Ibrahim D. Ali**
**MP Abdullah E. Gayak**

**MP Said Z. Salendab**
**MP Mohammad Shuaib Yacob**

**MP Eddie M. Alih**
**MP Abdullah B. Hashim**

(Sgd.)
**MP Amroussi A. Macatanong**
**MP Marjanie S. Macasalong**

**MP Suharto Esmael**
**MP Matarul M. Estino**

**MP Said M. Shiek**
**MP Abdullah G. Macapaar**

**MP Hussein P. Munoz**
**MP Dan S. Asnawie**

**MP Dr. Kadil M. Sinolinding, Jr.**
