Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
BARMM Compound, Cotabato City 9600

Second Regular Session
Proposed Resolution No. **292**

Introduced by BTA Member **Khalid Ma-amor Hadji Abdullah**

**RESOLUTION**
**COMMENDING AND CONGRATULATING THE PASSERS OF THE NOVEMBER 2022 PHILIPPINE BAR EXAMINATION CONDUCTED BY THE SUPREME COURT OF THE PHILIPPINES, MOST ESPECIALLY THE ONE HUNDRED FIFTEEN (115) NEW BANGSAMORO LAWYERS, UNDERSCORING THE EXAMS’ 14TH PLACER, FELLOW BANGSAMORO, AR-RASHID JAMMIH TARADJI**

**WHEREAS**, on the 14th day of April 2023, after almost five months from the last day of the November 2022 Bar Examination, the Supreme Court of the Philippines released the results of the said exam;

**WHEREAS**, a total of 3,992 out of 9,183 or 43.47% of examinees passed the 2022 Bar Examinations. And out of the 3,992 passers, 115 of which are fellow Bangsamoros;

**WHEREAS**, along with the release of the Bar Exam result is the announcement of the Top 30 examinees to which a fellow Bangsamoro, **Ar-rashid Jammih Taradji** from Ateneo de Zamboanga University, managed to secure the top 14th spot;

**WHEREAS**, it is with pride and honor to enumerate the names of the new Bangsamoro lawyers, viz¹:

1. ABANTAS, MOHAMMAD BIN SIRADJ MAMACOTAO
2. ABANTAS, SITTIE SAHRALYN ABBAS
3. ABDULKADIR, ALNAJAR LIGAN
4. ABDULLAH, ABDUL GAFFAR ABATON
5. ABDULRAHEEM, ASHA PATAY
6. ABUBACAR, JOHARI CAMID
7. ALI, NABEEL BENITO
8. ALIJUDDIN, SARA MAY TOLEDO
9. ALIUDIN, NORANISSA ACOB
10. ALONTO, ALAUYA ADIONG
11. AMAIKURUT, NASRIFAH MANANGGA
12. AMAL, SABRE MAULANA
13. AMIRUL, AL-JOEHAN ITUM
14. AMOD, JASMERAH PUNDOGAR
15. AMPATUAN, HANNIEF ALEGARME
16. AMSAWA, SAQINA NASSAL
17. ARUMPAC-DISAMBURUN, RIZMIN-AINE ABDUL
18. ASALI, SHARIEFA AYESHA TAN
19. BAHJIN, DATU FARHAD SAMMAIN
20. BALINDONG, ABDUL BARRY BUSRAN
21. BALINDONG, JAMENAH MARIE MAGOMNANG
22. BASMALA, HEDAYA SIME
23. BATO, JOHAIMEN MONIB
24. BEDIAL, HAMSEYA ABPI
25. BIRUAR, FAMIDA BALINDONG
26. BONGCAWIL, GHADA ZACARIAS
27. CALACA, NORJANIZAH AIRAH RAMOS
28. DARIMBANG, PRINCESS JOHANNI MARINELL DELA ROSA
29. DECAMPONG, ALVIMAR PAPANDAYAN
30. DIA, SITTIE AYNA DIMAPORO
31. DIACAT, ASHREFFAH UMBARO
32. DIAMEL, OMAR HUSSEIN MAMACOTAO
33. DIMALAWANG, ABDUL JABBAR MASIDING
34. DIMANGADAP, BADRON EMEM
35. DIMAPORO-ALONTO, FATIMA JAMILA DIMAPORO
36. DIPATUAN, NORHAINA DUCOL
37. DIRONGAWAN, DATU ASHARI BENEDICTO
38. DITUCALAN, JOHAIMA CATUMBAR
39. DOMATO, JOHARA GURO
40. EDRIS, ABDULLAH MACALUMPONG
41. ESMAIL, JARICA BARODI
42. FAISAL, RAYHANA DIBARATUN
43. GANI, SITTIE ASHIA DIATOR
44. GOLING, HONEYF GURO
45. GUBAT, SITTIE NASRIYYAH GANI
46. GUIMBOR, HAYA FAISAL
47. GUMBAHALI-HUSSIN, DESTIMONA NASSAL
48. GUNDARANGAN, SITTIE JOHAYRA SAGLAYAN
49. GURAR, SITTIE SALMA LAZIM
50. GURO, MEA MARIFE PLAZA
51. GURO, NORJANAH ISMAEL
52. GURO, SITTIE JOHAIRA SOLAIMAN
53. H.MOHAMMAD, NIHAYA PUNDATO
54. HADJI AMER, JIHANNOR KIRAM
55. HADJI SHARIEF, JOHAIR PICARAT
56. HUSSAIN, AMANIE USMAN
57. IBRAHIM, NUR-HUSSIEN ARUMPAC
58. JAMAL, SALIMA TAGBAR
59. KANSI, AMEER HUSSEIN PENDONG
60. KASAN, ALLYAHZA LUMPINGAN
61. LAKIM, NURFATHMA NUR
62. LANTUD, NORAJANNAH DIMANGADAP
63. LIDASAN, NES HASHIM BIRUAR
64. LU, FATIMA AREEJ SAHID
65. LUMANOG, BAI SORA RAVINA
66. MACABANDING, ABDUL AZIS CABILANGAN
67. MACADAWIB, ASLEAH CACASI
68. MACAPANTAR, JANICE-ZAH
69. MACARIMBANG-MACAGAAN, BOLAWAN YUSOPH
70. MACKNO, JOWAIDA MIKUNUG
71. MACOG, FATMA NOR ALJANNA ABAS
72. MADCASIM, AMER JR. MISSION
73. MALAWANI, NAIF ABUBACAR
74. MAMBATAO, ALIANNA ARNICA AMINODEN
75. MAMBUAY, NURHABIB BALISADO
76. MANALAO, PRINCESS JOHAIRA MALAMBUT
77. MANARONDONG, MOHAMMAD PLAWAN
78. MANDA, BIN MUDJAHEED SULOG
79. MANDA, NORIMA MANGORANDA
80. MANGATE, SITTIE MOHALIMA SARIPADA
81. MAROHOMBSAR, JANODIN MAROHOMBSAR
82. MEDADO-MANGUDADATU, RUCHELLE LOIUSE ALMINARES
83. MOHAMMAD YASSER, MAHTER ASGALI
84. MUHAMMAD, ASHRAF HASHEIMI MASTURA
85. MUNDER, ALI-UMMAR DIANALAN
86. MUNDER, ALIRAKIM TOCALO
87. MUYONG, MUDZAMAR ABDULRAJAK
88. NAGA, NAJIMAH RASMIA
89. OMAR, MIDZFAR HAMIS
90. PANGANDAMAN, ISNIHAYAH MAGANTOR
91. PANGKAL, SHAIMA EDURIA
92. PASANDALAN, NHASSER MANISI
93. PUMBAYA, PRINCESS JANNAH SAUDAGAR
94. PUNDAMUDAG, NORODIN DIMAKUTA
95. RANDE, MOHAMMAD-ALI USUDAN
96. RASAD, ABDURAHMAN ALSHEIK
97. SALEM, ABDUL WADUD TOMAWIS
98. SALLIMAN, JIMAEL SALAM DATUMANONG
99. SARANGANI, NASIMA DANGCAL
100. SARAWI, SHAREEN PANASANG
101. SARIP-MACAOMBAO, ALEAH ALAWI
102. SINENGGAYAN, SULTAN JR. GALMAK
103. SINSUAT, BAI JOHARA IRYNNA BANDILA
104. SOLAIMAN, AKRANNE AIDAH
105. SOLAIMAN, AMIRA INIONG
106. TAMANO, AMIL JIBRIL AHMAD BERNABE
107. TANOG, JUHAINAH LANTO
108. **TARADJI, AR-RASHID JAMMIH (TOP 14)**
109. TARADJI, ARZHEANA SAHID
110. TAURAC, ABDUL MOHAIMEN ANACTA
111. TOMAWIS, SITTIE ANIDA AMBANG
112. TUNGUPON, AMEERA JULIA HIMPON
113. WAGAS, DATU AMIR ESCANDAR
114. YAHYA, HANAN LATIP
115. YAP, ROLAN

**WHEREAS**, the Philippine Bar Examination is the professional licensure examination for lawyers in the country. It is the only professional licensure exam in the country that is not supervised by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC). It is arguably the most difficult licensure exam in the Philippines, and is exclusively administered by the Supreme Court of the Philippines through the Supreme Court Bar Examination Committee²;

**WHEREAS**, these Bar passers successfully scaled what time and again has proven to be a Herculean battery of exams. The families and supportive communities of these passers also deserve compliments for through their love and cheer, victory is achieved;

**WHEREAS**, this accomplishment by the 115 new Bangsamoro lawyers will definitely serve as an inspiration, not only to the aspiring lawyers, but also to all young professionals in the Bangsamoro Region, as it demonstrates that with passion, hard work, determination, and perseverance, one can excel in their chosen career;

**WHEREAS**, it is imperative that unwavering recognition be given to all Bangsamoro professionals in hurdling their respective licensure examinations to continuously ignite our young professionals’ will and determination to achieve greatness and illustrate that Bangsamoros are of exemplary quality;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, to commend and congratulate the passers of the November 2022 Philippine Bar Examination conducted by the Supreme Court of the Philippines, most especially the one hundred fifteen (115) new Bangsamoro lawyers, underscoring the exams’ 14th placer, fellow Bangsamoro, Ar-Rashid Jammih Taradji.

**ADOPTED**,

(Sgd.)
**KHALID M. HADJI ABDULLAH**
Member of Parliament
