Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

Parliament Resolution No. **230**

Introduced by
**MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authored by
**MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Benjamin T. Loong, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Atty. John Anthony L. Lim, Hatimil E. Hassan, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, Suwaib L. Oranon, Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Eddie M. Alih, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Tarhata M. Maglangit, Nabila Margarita P. Pangandaman, Michael E. Midtimbang, Atty. Jose I. Lorena, Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Nurredha I. Misuari, Matarul M. Estino, and Ramon A. Piang Sr.**

**RESOLUTION**

**REQUESTING THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP) REGIONAL OFFICE (PRO-BAR) TO ESTABLISH A TOURIST-POLICE ASSISTANCE DESK IN MAJOR HOTELS AND INNS LOCATED IN POPULAR TOURIST DESTINATIONS IN THE BANGSAMORO REGION**

**WHEREAS**, according to the Philippine Statistics Authority, the economy of the present BARMM decelerated from a positive rate in 2019 of 5.8% to a negative 1.9% in 2020. However, the regional economy strongly recovered in 2021, registering a 7.5% increase in 2021, the second-highest growth in the country;

**WHEREAS**, Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) sees various opportunities to revitalize the region’s economy owing to its vast natural resources as well as natural landscapes and environment, historical landmarks, sceneries and has a wide range of flora and fauna, pristine white sandy beaches, crystalline spring water, and towering waterfalls, and a variety of tourist attractions comparable to known tourist destinations in the country;

**WHEREAS**, the Security of tourists is essential for any destination starving to increase its popularity among its visitors being one of the primary factors to consider for any visiting tourists who essentially seek enjoyment, relaxation, and relief from the stressful work environment or for some work-related travel without having to worry about their personal safety and security;

**WHEREAS**, studies have shown that peace and order play a significant role in economic progress as investments will pour in considerably, and the potential market for tourism will potentially experience a surge;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro region has a long-standing history of the persisting presence of extremism and armed struggles that affected the tranquility and economic stability of the region for decades;

**WHEREAS**, at present, countries all over the world adopted the introduction of tourist police units to help to protect tourists;

**WHEREAS**, the tourism act of 2009 provides that “the Philippine National Police (PNP) shall establish a tourism security force to assist in maintaining peace and order within areas of high tourism” to ensure the safety and security of tourists in the country;

**WHEREAS**, the regional crime index of BARMM is reduced by more than 42% in 2021 where a total of 710 crime indexes were reported compared to 2017 where a total of 1676 index crimes in the BARMM covering the 5 provinces and Cotabato City per PNP report;

**WHEREAS**, the increased number of the deployed police force in different parts of the BARMM was considered as one of the huge contributory factors towards the achievement of the high crime solution efficiency rate;

**WHEREAS**, the influx of tourism in the region will significantly increase demands for hotels and guesthouse accommodation to house both local and international tourists and visitors that arrive in the region for conventions, symposiums, seminars, business trips, or merely for vacation;

**WHEREAS**, there are few related tourism enterprises operating in the region which are concentrated in urban centers and growth areas including hotels, inns, and resorts that are available for the accommodation of visiting tourists;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Government recognizes the vital and indispensable role of the Philippine National Police as the primary law enforcement unit to help maintain peace and order in the community and a significant stakeholder in LGU’s mission to build a progressive community of law-abiding citizenry;

**WHEREAS**, to ensure the personal safety and security of visiting tourists in any part of the region, there is a need to provide a Police Help Assistance desk to help facilitate the concerns of the tourists in the event that there shall exist threats to their life, security, and property;

**WHEREAS**, the neighboring city of Davao has been successful in implementing a similar project which helped the city to receive recognition as a tourist-friendly city that greatly impacts tourism as an essential economic industry;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Transition Parliament to REQUEST THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP) REGIONAL OFFICE (PRO-BAR) TO ESTABLISH A TOURIST - POLICE ASSISTANCE DESK IN MAJOR HOTELS AND INNS LOCATED IN POPULAR TOURIST DESTINATIONS IN THE BANGSAMORO REGION, which shall provide the following Information;

a. Name of the Chief of Police of the City/Municipality; and
b. Hotline numbers of the City/Municipal Police Station

**RESOLVED FURTHER**, that copies of this resolution be furnished to the Philippine National Police Regional Office (PRO-BAR) and other concerned agencies for information and consideration.

**ADOPTED,**

Author:
(Sgd.)
**HON. MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authors:
**HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA**
**HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG**
**HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN**
**HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG**
**HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
**HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO**
**HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL**
**HON. MP ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM**
**HON. MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN**
**HON. MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO**
**HON. MP SUWAIB L. ORANON**
**HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN**
**HON. MP EDDIE M. ALIH**
**HON. MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT**
**HON. MP NABILA MARGARITA P. PANGANDAMAN**
**HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**
**HON. MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI**
**HON. MP NURREDHA I. MISUARI**
**HON. MP MATARUL M. ESTINO**
**HON. MP RAMON A. PIANG SR.**

Certified Correct:
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:
**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
