Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Cotabato City

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session

Parliament Resolution No. **319**

Introduced by
**MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authored by
**MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Benjamin T. Loong, Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Atty. Jose I. Lorena, Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Diamila D. Ramos, Adzfar H. Usman, Mohammad Kelie U. Antao, Eddie M. Alih, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Mudjib C. Abu, Suwaib L. Oranon, Bassir D. Utto, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, and Michael E. Midtimbang**

**RESOLUTION**

**CALLING ON ALL THE MINISTRIES, AGENCIES, AND OFFICES, INCLUDING THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS OF THE BANGSAMORO, TO OBSERVE, COMPLY, AND MONITOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7277, KNOWN AS THE MAGNA CARTA FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITY, AS AMENDED**

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act No. 7277, otherwise known as the “Magna Carta for Persons with Disability,” recognizes that persons with disability are part of Philippine society with equal rights as other people and thus obliges the State to give full support to the improvement of their total well-being and their integration into the mainstream of society;

WHEREAS, the Magna Carta for Persons with Disability, as amended by Republic Act No. 10524, guaranty “equal opportunity for suitable employment” and parity rights to “terms and conditions of employment, compensation, privileges, benefits, fringe benefits, incentives or allowances”;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 10524 expanded the coverage of the said law to include *all government agencies, offices, or corporations* that are mandated to reserve for persons with disability at least one percent (1%) of all the positions therein; while private corporations with more than one hundred (100) employees are encouraged to do the same;

WHEREAS, Section 21 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10524 requires that *all government agencies shall be responsible for monitoring compliance of all offices/attached units under its jurisdiction/supervision* on the requirement of reserving at least one percent (1%) of all positions for Persons with Disability (PWD);

WHEREAS, Section 7 of Republic Act No. 11054, otherwise known as the “Bangsamoro Organic Law,” declares that the Bangsamoro Government shall ensure every Filipino citizen in its territorial jurisdiction the provision of the basic necessities and equal opportunities in life; and that it shall promote social justice in all aspects of life and phases of development;

WHEREAS, to ensure that persons with disability within the Bangsamoro Region enjoy equal opportunities in employment, compliance by the LGU and all concerned agencies with RA No. 10524 or the “Act Expanding the Positions Reserved for Persons with Disability” is of paramount significance;

**NOW, THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to **CALL ON ALL THE MINISTRIES, AGENCIES, INCLUDING THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS OF THE BANGSAMORO, TO OBSERVE, COMPLY, AND MONITOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7277, KNOWN AS THE MAGNA CARTA FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITY, AS AMENDED**;

**RESOLVED FURTHER**, that a copy of this resolution be forwarded to all the ministries, agencies, offices, and local government units in the Region for their immediate information and compliance.

**ADOPTED**,

Author:
**HON. MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE**

Co-authors:
**HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA**
**HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN**
**HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG**
**HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL**
**HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO**
**HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL**
**HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG**
**HON. MP JAAFAR APOLLO MIKHAIL L. MATALAM**
**HON. MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI**
**HON. MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**
**HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN**
**HON. MP DIAMILA D. RAMOS**
**HON. MP ADZFAR H. USMAN**
**HON. MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO**
**HON. MP EDDIE M. ALIH**
**HON. MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG**
**HON. MP MUDJIB C. ABU**
**HON. MP SUWAIB L. ORANON**
**HON. MP BASSIR D. UTTO**
**HON. MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO**
**HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG**

Certified Correct:
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested:
**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
