Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

Second Regular Session
Resolution No. **375**

Authors: MP Atty. Laisa Masuhud Alamia, MP Atty. Omar Yasser Sema, MP Rasol Mitmug Jr., MP Suharto Ambolodto, MP Rasul Ismael, MP Baintan Ampatuan, MP Amilbahar Mawallil, MP Don Mustapha Loong, MP Eddie Mapag Alih, MP Tawakal Midtimbang, MP Ishak Mastura, MP Atty. Jose Lorena, MP Susana Anayatin, and MP Adzfar Usman

**A RESOLUTION URGING THE BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT TO CONDUCT AN INQUIRY IN AID OF LEGISLATION ON THE SERIOUS IRREGULARITIES DURING THE 2023 HAJJ PILGRIMATE TO THE KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA (KSA), TO DIRECT THE BANGSAMORO PILGRIMAGE AUTHORITY TO DEVELOP POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE MATTER, AND TO ENDORSE THE SAME TO THE PHILIPPINE CONGRESS-BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT FORUM**

**WHEREAS**, Sec. 8(q) of Republic Act No. 9997, or the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos (“NCMF”) Act of 2009, provides that the NCMF shall “[a]dminister all programs, projects and activities, formulate the necessary rules and regulations, and coordinate with pertinent offices to ensure the success of the annual Hajj (pilgrimage) to Mecca, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia;”

**WHEREAS**, Art. V, Sec. 2(a) of Republic Act No. 11054, or the Organic Law of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (“OLBARMM”), provides that the Bangsamoro Government shall exercise authority over Hajj and Umrah, without prejudice to the general supervision of the President of the Republic of the Philippines;

**WHEREAS**, pursuant to Art. V, Sec. 3 of the OLBARMM, the Bangsamoro Government shall exercise powers for the promotion of the general welfare of its people, including the health and safety, and comfort and convenience of its inhabitants;

**WHEREAS**, the position of the National Government pertaining to organizing the Hajj Pilgrimage was clarified through a “guidance” issued by Executive Secretary Lucas Bersamin on April 3, 2023, in which it was stated that the NCMF “shall remain to be officially recognized as the sole government agency in charge of [H]ajj matters in the country,” while the Bangsamoro Government shall be “responsible for the processing of applications of pilgrims within the BARMM” and endorse the same to the NCMF;

**WHEREAS**, Art. VII, Sec. 5(a) of the OLBARMM empowers the Bangsamoro Parliament to conduct inquiries in aid of legislation in accordance with its rules, while respecting the rights of persons appearing or affected by such inquiry;

**WHEREAS**, Book IV, Title 3, Chapter 3, Sec. 43 of BAA No. 13, or the Bangsamoro Administrative Code, provides that the Bangsamoro Pilgrimage Authority (“BPA”) shall have primary jurisdiction over Hajj and Umrah matters affecting pilgrims within the Bangsamoro, and Sec. 44 of the same mandates the BPA to formulate and implement programs, projects, and activities for the efficient and effective administration of conducting pilgrimage activities or Bangsamoro pilgrims;

**WHEREAS**, Art. VI, Sec. 3 of the OLBARMM provides for the creation of the Philippine Congress-Bangsamoro Parliament Forum for the cooperation and coordination of legislative initiatives;

**WHEREAS**, the Hajj is one of the five pillars of Islam, a sacred duty of all physically and financially capable adult Muslims, and a symbol of Tawheed, unity, and equality;

**WHEREAS**, last June 2023, over 7,200 Filipinos arrived in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) to take part in the 2023 Hajj Pilgrimage;

**WHEREAS**, based on official and anecdotal reports, the 2023 Hajj Pilgrimage was plagued with serious irregularities and logistical concerns, including the mismanagement of food and hotel accommodations, delays in travel arrangements, and poor onsite handling;

**WHEREAS**, as a result of such serious irregularities, many Bangsamoro pilgrims experienced unnecessary discomfort from late and inadequate meals, overbooked accommodations, delayed transportation, and overall disorganized management;

**WHEREAS**, in the course of the 2023 Hajj Pilgrimage, some Bangsamoro pilgrims were subjected to extreme distress when they were temporarily separated from their family members and companions due to inadequate food, accommodation, and travel arrangements; exposed to serious medical risks from hunger, anxiety, and heat exhaustion; and stranded in multiple instances throughout the pilgrimage;

**WHEREAS**, being mindful of the fact that the Bangsamoro pilgrims had undertaken great physical, spiritual, and financial preparations, it is regrettable that such serious irregularities plagued the 2023 Hajj Pilgrimage;

**WHEREAS**, the irregularities described were isolated incidents, but instead have been found to be persistent problems experienced by other Bangsamoro pilgrims during the past few years, and must be expeditiously addressed to prevent further recurrence;

**NOW, THEREFORE**, be it

**RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, To immediately conduct an inquiry in aid of legislation on the serious irregularities and logistical concerns that surrounded the 2023 Hajj Pilgrimage.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, That the BPA is directed to conduct a rapid assessment and analysis of the policy landscape on the conduct of the annual Hajj Pilgrimage, and to develop key policy recommendations to streamline and improve the administration of the same.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, That the serious irregularities and logistical concerns, key findings from inquiries in aid of legislation, as well as the assessment and recommendations of the BPA be raised as urgent points for discussion in the Philippine Congress-Bangsamoro Parliament Forum for policy alignment, coordination, and exploration of possible legislative solutions to the perennial problems surrounding the Hajj Pilgrimage.

**RESOLVED, FINALLY**, That a copy of this Resolution be forwarded to the NCMF, BPA, Philippine Congress-Bangsamoro Parliament Forum, for their information and appropriate action.

**ADOPTED**,

AUTHORS:

**MP ATTY. LAISA MASUHUD ALAMIA**

**MP ATTY. OMAR YASSER SEMA**

**MP RASOL MITMUG JR.**

**MP SUHARTO AMBOLODTO**

**MP RASUL ISMAEL**

**MP BAINTAN AMPATUAN**

**MP AMILBAHAR MAWALLIL**

**MP DON MUSTAPHA LOONG**

**MP EDDIE MAPAG ALIH**

**MP TAWAKAL MIDTIMBANG**

**MP ISHAK MASTURA**

**MP ATTY. JOSE LORENA**

**MP SUSANA ANAYATIN**

**MP ADZFAR USMAN**
