Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
Cotabato City

BTA PARLIAMENT
Second Regular Session

Parliament Resolution No. 317

Introduced by
MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, JD, MPSA, CESE

Co-authored by
MPs Atty. Laisa A. Alamia, Engr. Baintan A. Ampatuan, Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Amilbahar S. Mawallil, Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, Rasol E. Ismael, Benjamin T. Loong, Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, Abdulkarim T. Misuari, Atty. Jose I. Lorena, Abdulaziz M. Amenoden, Diamila D. Ramos, Adzfar H. Usman, Mohammad Kelie U. Antao, Eddie M. Alih, Tawakal B. Midtimbang, Mudjib C. Abu, Suwaib L. Oranon, Bassir D. Utto, Bai Maleiha B. Candao, and Michael E. Midtimbang

RESOLUTION

CALLING ON THE MINISTRY OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MILG) AND THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION- BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (CSC-BARMM) TO ENCOURAGE ALL BANGSAMORO MINISTRIES, COMMISSIONS, AND OFFICES TO FULLY IMPLEMENT AND STRICTLY COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11032, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS “AN ACT PROMOTING EASE OF DOING BUSINESS AND EFFICIENT DELIVERY OF GOVERNMENT SERVICES,” BY STREAMLINING THE CURRENT SYSTEMS AND PROCEDURES OF GOVERNMENT SERVICES OF THEIR RESPECTIVE OFFICES.

WHEREAS, SECTION 7, Article III of the 1987 Constitution states that “[t]he right of the people to information on matters of public concern shall be recognized. Access to official records, and to documents, and papers pertaining to official acts, transactions, or decisions, as well as to government research data used as the basis for policy development, shall be afforded the citizen, subject to such limitations as may be provided by law”;

WHEREAS, Section 41, Article III of the Bangsamoro Organic Law (R.A. No. 11054) reiterates the constitutional provision that “public office is a public trust. Public officers and employees shall at all times be accountable to the people, serve them with utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty, and efficiency, act with patriotism and justice, and lead modest lives”;

WHEREAS, in order to accomplish this mandate, Congress passed R.A. No. 11032, otherwise known as “The Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018,” requiring, among others, that “all government agencies, including departments, bureaus, offices, instrumentalities, or government-owned and/or controlled corporations, or LGUs shall set up their respective most current and updated service standards to be known as the Citizen’s Charter in the form of information billboards xxx”;

WHEREAS, Section 9 of the Citizen’s Charter of the said Act provides that processing time for all applications and requests “shall not be longer than three (3) working days in the case of simple transactions and seven (7) working days in the case of complex transactions”; while “applications or requests involving activities which pose a danger to public health, public safety, public morals, public policy, and highly technical application, the prescribed processing time shall in no case be longer than twenty (20) working days or as determined by the government agency or instrumentality concerned, whichever is shorter.”

WHEREAS, the principle of moral governance in Islam requires every man, especially those in authority, to fulfill their Amanah, a concept found in the phrase “public office is a public trust.”

WHEREAS, during public hearings and district visitations of this representation and from the experience of other members of this Parliament, as well as social media posts by concerned individuals, however, we come to know that most of the offices in this Region are not acting within the appropriate time or in worse occasions, entirely ignoring their mandated tasks;

WHEREAS, non-performance or delays of a public officer or personnel in the performance of their respective duties will have an adverse impact and negative implications on the efficiency and effectiveness of the Government’s delivery of basic needs, thereby denying the Bangsamoro constituencies of their respective rights afforded them by the law;

WHEREAS, under the law, the only exceptions for non-compliance of their respective duties are either due to force majeure or natural or man-made disasters, which may result in damage or destruction of documents and/or system failure;

WHEREAS, the MILG, the counterpart of the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) in the region, which is tasked to ensure the full implementation of R.A. No. 11032, should create and launch a campaign or forum to remind the Bangsamoro of this law and the evils of not fulfilling once Amanah, by enlisting the assistance or in coordination with the counterparts of the Civil Service Commission (CSC) in the region, the Local Government Academy, and the Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP);

NOW THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED BY THE PARLIAMENT, to call on the Ministry of Interior and Local Government (MILG) and the Civil Service Commission- Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (CSC-BARMM) to encourage all Bangsamoro Ministries, Commissions, and Offices to fully implement and strictly comply with the provisions of Republic Act No. 11032 otherwise known as “an act promoting ease of doing business and efficient delivery of Government Services” by streamlining the current systems and procedures of Government Services of their respective offices;

FURTHER RESOLVED that copies of this resolution be forwarded to the Ministry of Interior and Local Governance (MILG), Civil Service Commission-Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (CSC-BARMM), and other concerned ministries and offices for information and appropriate consideration.

ADOPTED,

Author:

HON. MP ENGR. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, JD, MPSA, CESE

Co-authors:

HON. MP ATTY. LAISA A. ALAMIA

HON. MP ENGR. BAINTAN A. AMPATUAN

HON. MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG

HON. MP AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL

HON. MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO

HON. MP RASOL E. ISMAEL

HON. MP BENJAMIN T. LOONG

HON. MP ATTY. JOHN ANTHONY L. LIM

HON. MP JAAFAR APOLLO MIKHAIL L. MATALAM

HON. MP ABDULKARIM T. MISUARI

HON. MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA

HON. MP ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN

HON. MP DIAMILA D. RAMOS

HON. MP ADZFAR H. USMAN

HON. MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO

HON. MP EDDIE M. ALIH

HON. MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG

HON. MP MUDJIB C. ABU

HON. MP SUWAIB L. ORANON

HON. MP BASSIR D. UTTO

HON. MP BAI MALEIHA B. CANDAO

HON. MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG

Certified Correct:

PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL
Secretary General

Attested:

HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG
Speaker
