Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Gov. Gutierrez Ave., Rosary Heights VII Cotabato City

Second Parliament
Second Regular Session

**Proposed Resolution No. 398**

**AUTHORED BY:**

**MP Atty. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA**

**CO-AUTHORS:**

**MP Atty. MARY ANN M. ARNADO, MP Atty. UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, MP MATARUL M. ESTINO, and MP AIDA M. SILONGAN**

**RESOLUTION HONORING AND RECOGNIZING THE MEMBERS OF THE MEDIA FOR THEIR ROLE IN THE PEACE PROCESS AND THE PROMOTION OF TRANSPARENT AND ACCOUNTABLE GOVERNANCE**

**WHEREAS**, by virtue of Republic Act No. 11699, August 30 of every year is declared as National Press Freedom Day, a working holiday, in honor of Marcelo H. Del Pilar, the father of Philippine Journalism;

**WHEREAS**, the observance of the National Press Freedom Day underscores the importance of the media and press freedom in promoting democracy, human rights, and national development;

**WHEREAS**, the Philippine media has consistently demonstrated unwavering commitment to press freedom and responsible journalism, peace and development, and the pursuit of common democratic values;

**WHEREAS**, the continuing Bangsamoro peace process formalized in the peace agreements between the Philippine Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and Moro National Liberation Fronts are vital in addressing longstanding social, political, and economic issues not just in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM), but in the whole of Mindanao;

**WHEREAS**, the media plays a crucial role in sustaining the gains of the peace process, and in promoting a culture of peace and understanding among diverse communities in the region by helping contextualize the Bangsamoro's quest for peace and right to self-determination, by keeping stakeholders abreast of developments in the peace process, and by fostering the faithful execution of the letter and spirit of the peace agreements;

**WHEREAS**, the media is instrumental in keeping the public well-informed about important developments in the BARMM, in encouraging civic engagement, and in promoting moral governance;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Government recognizes the vital role of media in ensuring transparency and accountability in government and will continue to foster an enabling environment for press freedom, ensuring media practitioners can carry out their duties without fear or intimidation and responsible journalism can thrive;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, that the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) Parliament honors and recognizes the members of the media for their role in the peace process and in the promotion of transparent and accountable governance;

**BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED**, that a copy of this resolution be furnished to media organizations, the Bangsamoro Information Office, and all relevant stakeholders, as an expression of the sincere appreciation of the BTA Parliament of the invaluable contributions of media practitioners to sustainable peace and development in the Bangsamoro region.

Adopted on this ___ day of August 2023 at ______________________, Cotabato City.

Author:

(Sgd.)
**MP Atty. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA**

Co-Authors:

**MP Atty. MARY ANN M. ARNADO**
**MP Atty. UBAIDA C. PACASEM**
**MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG**
**MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL**
**MP MATARUL M. ESTINO**
**MP AIDA M. SILONGAN**
