Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

**Resolution No. 376**

Authored by: **MPs KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., MD, DPBO,**

**MP ATTY. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA, MP SUSANA S. ANAYATIN, MP AKMAD I. ABAS, MP PROF. EDDIE M. ALIH, MP SUHARTO S. ESMAEL, MP FROILYN T. MENDOZA, MP MP MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG, MP JAAFAR APOLLO MIKHAIL L. MATALAM, MP ATTY. RASOL Y. MITMUG JR., MP DAN S. ASNAWIE, MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN, MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG**

**RESOLUTION**

**CONDEMNING TO THE HIGHEST LEVEL THE GRUESOME KILLING OF MR. EZELL A. TAN, AND URGING THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY (MPOS), PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PRO-BAR) AND THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (NBI-BARMM), AND OTHER CONCERNED AGENCIES TO CONDUCT AN IMMEDIATE AND IMPARTIAL INVESTIGATION**

**WHEREAS**, Section 4, Article II of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines states in part that “*The prime duty of the Government is to serve and protect the People*”;

**WHEREAS**, Section 11, Article II of the same declares, “*The State values the dignity of every human person and guarantees the full respect for human rights*”;

**WHEREAS**, Section 1, Article III of the Bill of Rights states that “*No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, nor shall any person be denied the equal protection of laws*”;

**WHEREAS**, Section 6 of Article IX of R.A. 11054, also known as Organic law for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao states that “*The Bangsamoro Government shall fully respect human rights*”;

**WHEREAS**, Mr. Ezell A. Tan, CPA, REA, MPA, CTT, 34-year-old, a resident of Rosary Heights 5, Cotabato City, and Accountant of Commission on Population and Development (POPCOM) Region XII was reported missing on July 18, 2023, while riding in his black Toyota Avanza, and on July 23, 2023, he was found dead in Barangay Molimoc, Municipality of Balabagan, Lanao del Sur, sustained torture marks and bullet wounds;

**WHEREAS**, the brutal killing of Mr. Tan is not the first of its kind. This killing is the latest incident to fall under the unexplained and senseless series of killings in the Bangsamoro Region;

**WHEREAS**, due to this alarming and unexplained killing of Mr. Tan, it is imperative to call concerned government authorities to conduct an impartial and thorough investigation to shed light on the reasons behind it and to ensure that justice be served to Mr. Tan, his family, and relatives and that such heinous acts could be addressed and prevented in the future;

**NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED AS HEREBY RESOLVED**, to strongly condemn to the highest level the gruesome killing of Mr. Ezell A. Tan and urge the Ministry of Public Order and Safety (MPOS), Philippine National Police (PNP-PROBAR), National Bureau of Investigation (NBI BARMM), and other concerned agencies to conduct an immediate and impartial investigation.

**ADOPTED.**

Author:
(Sgd.)
**KADIL M. SINOLINDING JR. MD., DPBO**

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested By:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker