Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
Cotabato City

**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Second Parliament
Second Regular Session

Proposed Resolution No. **303**

Introduced By Principal Authors:

**HON. RASOL YAP MITMUG, JR., HON. LAISA M. ALAMIA, HON. SUHARTO AMBOLODTO, HON. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, HON. RASUL E. ISMAEL, HON. DON MUSTAPHA LOONG, HON. AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL, HON. ISHAK V. MASTURA, HON. SITTIE FAHANIE S. UY-OYOD, HON. PAISALIN P. TAGO, HON. OMAR YASSER C. SEMA**

Co-authors:
**HON. RANDOLPH C. PARCASIO, HON. TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT, HON. ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN, HON. HASHEM N. DILANGALEN, HON. JAAFAR MIKHAIL L. MATALAM, HON. DAMILA D. RAMOS, HON. FROILYN T. MENDOZA, HON. KHALID M. HADJI ABDULLAH**

**A RESOLUTION AMENDING SECTION 2 AND SECTION 5, RULE I OF ADOPTED RESOLUTION NO. 268, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE RULES, PROCEDURES, AND PRACTICES OF THE BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT, RENAMING OR CHANGING THE TITLE OF MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT INTO MEMBER OF THE BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT (MBP) AND THE TERM PARLIAMENT INTO BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT**

**WHEREAS**, the purpose of Republic Act No. 11054, also known as the Bangsamoro Organic Law, is to establish a political entity, provide for its basic structure of government in recognition of the justness and legitimacy of the cause of the Bangsamoro people and the aspirations of Muslim Filipinos and all indigenous cultural communities in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to secure their identity and posterity, allowing for meaningful self-governance within the framework of the Constitution and the national sovereignty as well as territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines¹;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao is the only region which adopts a parliamentary system in our country with a presidential system of government;

**WHEREAS**, based on our observations and experiences during the town hall meetings² in different municipalities of Lanao del Sur, only few constituents have the knowledge of the existence of the parliament in the Bangsamoro Region;

**WHEREAS**, it is well – known that the Bangsamoro People, for decades, has continued to assert their right to self – determination and independence;

**WHEREAS**, the fruit of their decades of struggle is the establishment of the autonomous Bangsamoro government system which is parliamentary – democratic, with greater autonomy than other regions in our country;

**WHEREAS**, with the word “Bangsamoro” describing the parliament, it is fathomable why the Bangsamoro Region has parliament while the rest of the regions in the Philippines have presidential system;

**WHEREAS**, there is a possibility, in the course of time, that the Philippines will adopt a parliamentary system of government. Hence, we can place the Bangsamoro Parliament distinctly from the rest of Parliaments in the Philippines;

**WHEREAS**, as to the official title of the member of parliament in the Bangsamoro Region, it is most desirable to add the word “Bangsamoro” as descriptive for the members to be easily recognizable;

**WHEREAS**, same with the case of Scottish Parliament. Scottish Parliament is also an autonomous under the Parliament of United Kingdom;

**WHEREAS**, in the Scottish Parliament, the title given to its members is Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP), making the members distinguishable from other members of parliament under the Parliament of United Kingdom;

**NOW, THEREFORE**, be it

**RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved, by the BTA Parliament, To amend section 2 and section 5, rule I of Adopted Resolution No. 268, otherwise known as the *Rules, Procedures, And Practices of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament*, renaming or changing the Title of Member of Parliament into Member of the Bangsamoro Parliament (MBP) and the term Parliament into Bangsamoro Parliament, to read as follows:

**Section 2. Applicability.** – This Rules shall govern the legislative procedures in the conduct of all Page 2 AR 268 sessions, committee hearings and meetings, and other similar activities of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) Parliament, hereinafter **“Bangsamoro Parliament”**.

**Section 5. Title of the Parliament Member.** – The official title of the Parliament Members shall be **Member of the Bangsamoro Parliament**.

Adopted,

AUTHORS:
(Signed)
**ATTY. RASOL YAP MITMUG, JR.**

Certified correct:
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested:
**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
