Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

**Second Regular Session**

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 428**

Introduced by
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPUATUAN, MNSA**

Co-Authored by:
MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., MP Rasul E. Ismael, MP Tawakal B. Midtimbang, MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam, MP Michael E. Midtimbang, MP Atty. Sittie Fahanie S. Uy-Oyod, MP Khalid Ma-Ampor Hadji Abdullah and MP Bassir. D. Utto

**RESOLUTION**

**ENCOURAGING THE BANGKO SENTRAL NG PILIPINAS (BSP) THROUGH ITS MONETARY BOARD TO ESTABLISH ATLEAST ONE (1) BANK PER MUNICIPALITY IN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM)**

**WHEREAS**, Section 20, Article II of the 1987 Philippine Constitution provides that the State recognizes the indispensable role of the private sector, encourages private enterprise, and provides incentives to needed investments;

**WHEREAS**, Section 26, Article II of the Constitution categorically provides that the State shall guarantee equal access to opportunities for public service;

**WHEREAS**, Section 24, Article II of the Constitution states that the State recognizes the vital role of communication and information in nation-building;

**WHEREAS**, Section 31, Article XIII of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11054 or the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL) provides that the Bangsamoro Government shall encourage the establishment of:

(a) Bank and financial institutions and their branches including an Islamic window in domestic and foreign conventional banks; and
(b) Offshore banking units of foreign banks within the principle of the Islamic banking system;

**WHEREAS**, Section 2, Chapter I of R.A. No. 8791, or the General Banking Law of 2000, provides that the State recognizes the vital role of banks providing an environment conducive to the sustained development of the national economy and the fiduciary nature of banking that requires high standards of integrity and performance;

**WHEREAS**, the same provision provides that the State shall promote and maintain a stable and efficient banking and financial system that is globally competitive, dynamic and responsive to the demands of a developing economy;

**WHEREAS**, a bank is defined as an entity engaged in the lending of funds obtained in the form of deposits¹;

**WHEREAS**, banks are classified into:
(a) Universal banks;
(b) Commercial banks;
(c) Thrift banks;
(d) Rural banks;
(e) Cooperative banks;
(f) Islamic banks; and
(g) other classifications of banks as determined by the Monetary Board of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP)²;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) is the country’s central monetary authority. It enjoys fiscal and administrative autonomy from the National Government in the pursuit of its mandated responsibilities³;

**WHEREAS**, the BSP has supervision over the operations of banks and exercises such regulatory powers as provided in the New Central Bank Act and other pertinent laws over the operations of finance companies and non-bank financial institutions performing quasi-banking functions⁴;

**WHEREAS**, Section 3, Article I of R.A. No. 7653, as amended by R.A. 11211, provides that the Bangko Sentral shall provide policy directions in the areas of money, banking, and credit. It shall have supervision over the operations of banks and exercise such regulatory and examination powers as provided in this Act and other pertinent laws over the quasi-banking operations of non-bank financial institutions;


¹ Section 3.1 Chapter I of R.A. No. 8791
² Ibid.
³ https://www.bsp.gov.ph/SitePages/AboutTheBank/AboutTheBank.aspx
⁴ Ibid.