Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

Second Parliament
Second Regular Session

**Proposed Resolution No. 437**

Authored by:

**MP ATTY. SHA ELIJAH DUMAMA-ALBA**

Co-authors:

**MP Atty. MARY ANN M. ARNADO, MP Atty. UBAIDA C. PACASEM, MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, MP SUHARTO ESMAEL, MP MATARUL M. ESTINO, MP Engr. AIDA M. SILONGAN, MP MOHAGHER M. IQBAL, MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN, and MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**

**RESOLUTION EARNESTLY REQUESTING THE CHIEF PUBLIC ATTORNEY, DR. PERSIDA V. RUEDA-ACOSTA, DSD TO RESTORE THE SUPERVISION OVER THE PUBLIC ATTORNEY’S OFFICES IN MAGUINDANAO, BASILAN, SULU, AND TAWI-TAWI TO THE PUBLIC ATTORNEY’S OFFICE-BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO (BARMM) REGIONAL OFFICE**

**WHEREAS**, Section 3 of the Republic Act No. 9406 states that “[t]he Public Attorney’s Office (PAO) shall independently discharge its mandate to render, free of charge, legal representation, assistance, and counselling to indigent persons in criminal, civil, labor, administrative and other quasi-judicial cases. In the exigency of the service, the PAO may be called upon by proper government authorities to render such service to other persons, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations;”

**WHEREAS**, Section 5 of the same law provides that the authority and responsibility for the exercise of the mandate of the PAO and for the discharge of its powers and functions shall be vested in the Chief Public Attorney;

**WHEREAS**, the esteemed Dr. Persida V. Rueda-Acosta, DSD, who was appointed as the nationwide head of the Public Attorney’s Office (PAO) on February 23, 2001 by former President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, is the current Chief Public Attorney;

**WHEREAS**, Chief Public Attorney Dr. Rueda-Acosta is known for her laudable commitment to the objectives of her office, which are to grant the indigent sector access to legal counsel in their time of need, and to steadfastly uphold the Constitutional guarantee of free access to courts, due process, and equal protection of the laws and restore people’s faith in the judicial system;

**WHEREAS**, under the Republic Act No. 11054 otherwise known as the Organic Law for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, the territorial jurisdiction of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region includes the provinces of Basilan, Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, Maguindanao, and Lanao Del Sur, and the cities of Lamitan and Marawi;

**WHEREAS**, sometime in 2009, Basilan, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi were removed from the supervision of the PAO-BARMM Regional Office and were placed under the supervision of the Zamboanga Peninsula Region (Region 9B) pursuant to the directives of Chief Public Attorney Dr. Rueda-Acosta;

**WHEREAS**, in 2015, Maguindanao was likewise removed from the supervision of the same regional office and was transferred to PAO-SOCCSKSARGEN region;

**WHEREAS**, only the province of Lanao del Sur remains under the supervision of PAO-BARMM;

**WHEREAS**, the PAO-BARMM Regional Office has been entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring that justice is accessible to all, particularly in the areas of Maguindanao and the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM);

**WHEREAS**, the placement of the aforementioned PAO offices outside the supervision of the PAO-BARMM Region hinders access to legal representation and support for the residents of the region and impedes the PAO-BARMM from meeting the growing legal needs of its intended clients;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Parliament acknowledges the crucial role of the PAO not just in providing legal services and representation to indigent litigants in the BARMM, but also in regional policy formulation;

**NOW, THEREFORE**, be it **RESOLVED**, **AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, that the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament earnestly requests the Chief Public Attorney, Dr. Persida V. Rueda-Acosta, DSD to restore the supervision over the Public Attorney’s Offices in Maguindanao, Basilan, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi to the PAO-BARMM Regional Office;

**RESOLVED FURTHER**, that the Bangsamoro Parliament calls on the PAO to take all necessary measures to ensure the smooth and efficient transition of supervision over PAO-Maguindanao and PAO-Basilan, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi back to the PAO-BARMM Regional Office;

**RESOLVED FINALLY**, that a copy of this resolution be submitted to the Office of the Chief Public Attorney for its consideration.

Adopted on this ____ day of October 2023 at ___________, Cotabato City.

Author:

(Sgd.)
**MP ATTY. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA**

Co-authors:

**MP Atty. MARY ANN M. ARNADO**
**MP Atty. UBAIDA C. PACASEM**

**MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG**
**MP SUHARTO ESMAEL**

**MP MATARUL M. ESTINO**
**MP Engr. AIDA M. SILONGAN**

**MP MOHAGHER M. IQBAL**
**MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN**

**MP BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**
