Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

**SECOND REGULAR SESSION**

**PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 455**

Introduced by Principal Authors:
**HON. RASOL YAP MITMUG, JR.,**

Co-authors:
**HON. LAISA M. ALAMIA, HON. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO, HON. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPUATUAN, HON. RASUL E. ISMAEL, HON. DON MUSTAPHA A. LOONG, HON. AMILBAHAR S. MAWALLIL, HON. SUSANA S. ANAYATIN, HON. MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO, HON. ABDULAZIZ M. AMENODEN, HON. DENMARTIN A. KAHALAN, HON. RAMON A. PINAG SR., HON. ALI B. SOLAIMAN, HON. TARHATA M. MAGLANGIT, HON. ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, HON. MICHAEL E. MIDTIMBANG, HON. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA, HON. HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN**

**A RESOLUTION GRANTING A POSTHUMOUS AWARD AND HONOR TO MR. EDISON B. MORALES FOR HIS GREAT CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE CITY OF COTABATO AND THE BANGSAMORO REGION**

WHEREAS, Mr. Edison B. Morales has dedicated his life to elevating the standard of education in Cotabato City and the broader BARMM region, positively impacting countless students and the community;

WHEREAS, Mr. Morales founded the Albert Einstein School (AES) in Cotabato City in 1982, providing quality education and fostering an environment of excellence and holistic development for the youth of the region;

WHEREAS, under his leadership, AES produced regional and national finalists and champions not only in the fields of sciences and math but also in cultural dances, essay writing, and the arts, thereby putting Cotabato City and BARMM on the map as one of the bright schools in the country;

WHEREAS, Mr. Morales emphasized the school's motto, "Mens sana en corpore sano" (a sound mind in a sound body), ensuring a balanced focus on academics, sports, leadership, and extracurricular activities;

WHEREAS, AES, under Mr. Morales's guidance and mentorship, has a proven track record of producing outstanding leaders who have made significant contributions in various fields, shining a spotlight on the region and the city and showcasing the immense talent and potential of the Bangsamoro people;

WHEREAS, Mr. Morales's legacy is one of excellence, discipline, and holistic development, with his distinct and often heard "Hey!" across the hallway becoming a symbol of his commitment to molding his students into their best selves;

WHEREAS, his success brings immense pride and honor to the region, as he demonstrated the ingrained values of excellence, determination, and hard work of the Bangsamoro people and his lifetime of achievements deserves to be recognized by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority;

WHEREAS, the legacy of Mr. Morales serves as an inspiration not only to the youth but to the general Bangsamoro population, emphasizing the importance of education, discipline, and holistic development. His dedication and commitment, despite the challenges faced, prove that with perseverance and discipline, one can leave a lasting impact on society;

WHEREAS, it has become the policy of the Bangsamoro Parliament to give honor to those Bangsamoro notable figures for their contributions to the welfare and development of the Bangsamoro Region by ensuring that their legacies which they have painstakingly cultivated are encouraged and passed on to the future generations of Bangsamoro;

**NOW, THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, To grant a Posthumous Award and Honor to Mr. Edison B. Morales for his great contributions to the Educational Development in the City of Cotabato and the Bangsamoro Region.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, That this resolution be presented to the family of Mr. Edison B. Morales, Albert Einstein School (AES), for information.

Adopted,

AUTHOR:

**HON. RASOL YAP MITMUG, JR.**

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested:

**HON. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
