Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**

**BTA RESOLUTION NO. 401**

Introduced by:

**MP DR. SUSANA SALVADOR – ANAYATIN**

Co-Authors:

**A RESOLUTION CONDEMNING IN THE STRONGEST POSSIBLE TERMS THE AMBUSH OF MR. PEDRO D. TATO, JR., AND THE KILLING OF MR. MOHAMMAD HESSAM MIDTIMBANG, CALLING ALL CONCERNED BARMM AGENCIES TO CONDUCT A SPEEDY INVESTIGATION IN ORDER TO SERVE JUSTICE TO THEIR FAMILIES**

**WHEREAS**, Section 5, Article II of the 1987 Philippine Constitution provides that “the maintenance of peace and order, the protection of life, liberty, and property, and promotion of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessing of democracy.”

**WHEREAS**, on August 15, 2023, a shooting incident occurred at Rosary Heights 10. According to Mr. Almendras Rinabor, the Public Safety Officer of the City Government of Cotabato, the unknown gunmen shot the vehicle boarded by Mr. Pedro D. Tato, Jr. The incident led to the death of the driver of the said vehicle, Mr. Dandy Anonat, and wounding Mr. Tato, Jr.

**WHEREAS**, six (6) days after, on August 21, 2023, another shooting incident took place in Cotabato City, this time at Governor Gutierrez Avenue, Rosary Heights 9, an unknown motorcycle gunmen shot and killed Mr. Mohammad Hessam A. Midtimbang.

**WHEREAS**, Mr. Pedro Tato, Jr. is currently the General Services Officer of the City Government of Cotabato, while Mr. Midtimbang is a radio host in an Islamic radio station under the Bangsamoro Darul – Iftah.

**WHEREAS**, it is disheartening that similar events of killing have been rampant in the city of Cotabato. The Bangsamoro people cannot freely exercise their rights when there is fear. Thus, this resolution is to express the strongest condemnation of such killings and to serve justice for the untimely death of the victims.

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Parliament – Bangsamoro Transition Authority of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao **A RESOLUTION CONDEMNING IN THE STRONGEST POSSIBLE TERMS THE AMBUSH OF MR. PEDRO D. TATO, JR., AND THE KILLING OF MR. MOHAMMAD HESSAM MIDTIMBANG, CALLING ALL CONCERNED BARMM AGENCIES TO CONDUCT A SPEEDY INVESTIGATION IN ORDER TO SERVE JUSTICE TO THEIR FAMILIES**

**ADOPTED**, September ____, 2023.

Author:

(Sgd.)
**DR. SUSANA S. ANAYATIN**
Member – BTA Parliament

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**ATTY. ALI PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker