Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

Proposed Resolution No. **471**

Introduced by:
**MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG**

Co-authors:
**MP SAID M. SHEIK, MP BASIT S. ABBAS, MP ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR,**
**MP AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, and MP ALI B. SOLAIMAN**

**A RESOLUTION**

**EXPRESSING THE SENSE OF THE BANGSAMORO GOVERNMENT VEHEMENTLY CONDEMNING THE VICIOUS ATTACK AND TRAGIC BOMBING INCIDENT THAT TRANSPIRED IN MSU DIMAPORO GYMNASIUM DURING AN ONGOING CATHOLIC MASS ON DECEMBER 3, 2023**

**WHEREAS**, on December 3, during a peaceful Sunday morning mass regularly conducted by non-Muslim students of Mindanao State University – Marawi, a reprehensible act of violence was perpetrated through the brazen bombing of MSU Dimaporo Gymnasium;

**WHEREAS**, Philippine National Police reported through Chief PBGen. Benjamin Acorda Jr. that the incident happened around 7:40 in the morning and due to the explosion, there were four (4) dead and forty-five (45) wounded;

**WHEREAS**, Mindanao State University was created as a policy instrument of the government to address the twin goals of peace and development;

**WHEREAS**, Mindanao State University is a unique place where there is a city within a university. It has become a Melting Pot of the South, where people meet to learn, connect and grow together. The students are living proof of the cultural diversity inside the campus;

**WHEREAS**, despite that it is situated in the Islamic City of Marawi where more than majority of the residents are Muslims, Mindanao State University shows utmost respect to students with different religious beliefs and refrains to do acts which would curtail the free exercise of their respective religions;

**WHEREAS**, as Muslims, we are guided by the Qur’an 17:70 which provides that “everyone’s God-given human dignity must be respected, regardless of his or her faith, race, ethnic origin, gender or social status. Because everyone is created by God Almighty, the Maker of all, humans must treat one another with full honor, respect and loving kindness”;

**WHEREAS**, the right to practice one’s faith without fear of violence or persecution is a fundamental human right;

**WHEREAS**, this incident not only disrupts the peace and harmony within the academic setting but also jeopardizes the delicate equilibrium of cultural diversity that Mindanao State University fostered over the years;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Government shall guarantee religious freedom and the free exercise thereof pursuant to the Constitution, national laws and principles of international law. It shall protect all persons from harassment or any undue pressure, coercion and violence on account of religion;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Government shall fully respect human rights;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, that the Bangsamoro Parliament, through this Resolution, expresses condemnation in the strongest sense, the vicious attack and tragic bombing incident that transpired in MSU Dimaporo Gymnasium during an ongoing catholic mass in the morning of December 3, 2023.

**ADOPTED**, ___________

Author:
(Signed)
**MP MARJANIE S. MACASALONG**
Member of Parliament

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker
