Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Cotabato City
**BTA PARLIAMENT**
Second Regular Session
**Proposed Resolution No. 436**

Principal Author:
**MP DIAMILA DISIMBAN-RAMOS**

Co-authors:
**MP ALI SOLAIMAN, MP DENMARTIN KAHALAN,**
**MP DR. SUSANA ANAYATIN, MP SAID SHEIK**

**RESOLUTION**
**CONGRATULATING AND COMMENDING THE BARMM MEN’S VOLLEYBALL TEAM FOR WINNING THE GOLD IN THE RECENTLY CONCLUDED NATIONAL STATE COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION (NSCUAA) GAMES 2023, AND FOR BRINGING PRIDE AND HONOR TO THE BANGSAMORO PEOPLE**

**WHEREAS**, the 1987 Philippine Constitution provides that the State shall promote physical education and encourage sports programs, league competitions, and amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to foster self-discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Organic Law provides that the Bangsamoro Government shall promote, among others, the mental and physical fitness of the youth through sports (Sec. 13, Article IX, RA 11054);

**WHEREAS**, pursuant to this mandate, the Bangsamoro Government is committed to promoting sports, by encouraging and supporting programs, leagues, competitions, indigenous games, martial arts, and amateur sports;

**WHEREAS**, the National State Colleges and Universities Athletic Association (NSCUAA) Games 2023 was held at New Clark City Athletic Stadium, Capas, Tarlac, Philippines from October 1 to 6, 2023, and was participated in by over 60,000 student-athletes nationwide from 114 state universities and colleges;

**WHEREAS**, on October 5, 2023, the BARMM Men’s Volleyball Team representing Tawi-Tawi Regional Agricultural College (TRAC) clinched the gold medal, thereby making history for the Bangsamoro people;

**WHEREAS**, the BARMM Men’s Volleyball Team consists of fifteen (15) Bangsamoro athletes, namely, Mr. Hamil I. Junni, Mr. Abdulrahul S. Janani, Mr. Elsad M. Akmad, Mr. Muktal T. Peria, Mr. Cesar Adamil, Mr. Alqhadie C. Jali, Mr. Alhadzkal J. Sasapan, Mr. Midzran Bangsa, Mr. Renard K. Casera, Mr. Alih Faizal Gampong, Mr. Alsahbil I. Hadji, Mr. Asnar L. Napie, Mr. Brayan K. Sahirin, Mr. Esmail M. Kasim and Mr. Dickson Sapplani, coached by Mr. Abraham J. Tandi as the Head Coach and Mr. Edward R. Lee as the Assistant Coach and with four (4) coaching staff, namely; Mr. Aljasmin Asaali, Mr. Herman Sappalani, Mr. Alfaidie Asaali and Mr. Al-Siradz Asakil;

**WHEREAS**, the team exhibited commendable gallantry and sportsmanship by winning three (3) sets against Region VI (Western Visayas) consecutively;

**WHEREAS**, the exemplary performance of the BARMM Men’s Volleyball Team serves as a source of inspiration not only to budding young athletes within the Bangsamoro but also to other aspiring athletes throughout the Philippines;

**WHEREAS**, by winning this national tournament, the BARMM Men’s Volleyball Team has made the region proud and has shown the entire country the Bangsamoro spirit of competitiveness and excellence;

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority expresses deep appreciation and immense pride in recognizing the BARMM Men’s Volleyball Team for their remarkable achievement, extending full recognition and highest commendation for the distinction they have brought to the Bangsamoro people;

**NOW THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority to extend its sincerest congratulations and commendation to the BARMM Men’s Volleyball Team for their exemplary achievement of winning gold medal in the recently concluded NSCUAA Games 2023, and for bringing pride and honor to the Bangsamoro people.**

**RESOLVE, FURTHER, to present a copy of this resolution to the BARMM Men’s Volleyball Team as a token of our recognition and appreciation of their exemplary achievement, and for their information and its necessary effects.**

Author:
**DIAMILA DISIMBAN-RAMOS**
Member of the BTA Parliament

Co-authors:

**ALI SOLAIMAN**
Member of the BTA Parliament

**DENMARTIN KAHALAN**
Member of the BTA Parliament

**DR. SUSANA ANAYATIN**
Member of the BTA Parliament

**SAID SHEIK**
Member of the BTA Parliament
