Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

Second Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No.: 502**

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Introduced by:**
**MPs Hashemi N. Dilangalen, MD, CHA**

**Co-Authored by:**
**MPs Ali Montaha D. Babao, Rasul E. Ismael, Tarhata M. Maglangit, Abdulwahab M. Pak**

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**RESOLUTION**
**CREATING WITHIN THE BTA PARLIAMENT, A COMMITTEE ON CULTURE, ARTS, CULTURAL COMMUNITIES AND CREATIVE INDUSTRIES, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE ADOPTED RESOLUTION NO. 268**

**WHEREAS,** the absence of a dedicated cultural affairs committee within the Bangsamoro Parliament is a poignant oversight.

**WHEREAS,** a fast glance comparing parliamentary structures globally reveals this deficiency. For instance, the UK Parliament has a Digital, Culture, Media and Sports department; the Canadian Parliament has a standing Committee on Canadian Heritage in the House of Commons; the French Parliament has a Committee on Cultural Affairs and Education; and Germany has a Committee on Culture and Media— all of which addresses legislative points on culture and heritage matters.

**WHEREAS,** at the national level, the Philippine Senate has a standing committee on Cultural Communities and Muslim Affairs; a recent addition to Senate’s already existing committee on Basic Education and Culture; similar to that as found at the House of Representatives.

**WHEREAS,** this void in the Bangsamoro Parliament not only reflects a discrepancy in alignment with global parliamentary, even our national government norms but, more crucially, raises concerns about the comprehensive recognition and prioritization of the Bangsamoro region’s rich cultural heritage and identity. The current set-up demands immediate rectification.

**WHEREAS,** these committees serve as dedicated forums for the nuanced deliberation of cultural policies, preservation initiatives, and the promotion of artistic and creative endeavors. The absence of such a committee in the Bangsamoro Parliament puts it at odds with international standards, hindering the region's ability to fully engage with the global discourse on cultural development.

**WHEREAS,** Culture, being a cornerstone of the Bangsamoro identity, demands a dedicated and specialized platform for discourse within the parliamentary framework. The absence of a cultural affairs committee undermines the significance of the unique and special cultural heritage of the Bangsamoro within the broader cause and identity.

This oversight risks relegating cultural matters to the periphery, potentially diminishing the visibility and appreciation of the distinctiveness of the Bangsamoro culture.

**WHEREAS,** the establishment of a Committee on Culture, Arts, Cultural Communities and Creative Industries is not merely symbolic; rather, it is an essential component of effective governance. Culture is intricately woven into the fabric of policy-making, influencing various aspects of social, economic, and community development. Without a dedicated committee, the nuanced considerations required for the comprehensive integration of culture into policies may be inadvertently overlooked.

**WHEREAS,** beyond the preservation of heritage and artistic endeavors, a Committee on Culture, Arts, Cultural Communities and Creative Industries is instrumental in unlocking the economic potential of the region. By fostering a thriving culture and arts economy, the committee can contribute significantly to the region's overall prosperity and well-being.

**WHEREAS,** in light of these considerations, this resolution aims to rectify this void and oversight to affirm the Bangsamoro Parliament's commitment to the holistic development of the region through the establishment of a dedicated Committee on Culture, Arts, Cultural Communities and Creative Industries. It aims to elevate the importance of the Bangsamoro culture within the parliamentary framework and ensure its integral role in shaping the identity and policies of the region.

**NOW, THEREFORE,** be it resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, as it hereby resolves that:

**Section 1. Committee on Culture, Arts, Cultural Communities and Creative Industries.** A Committee on Culture, Arts, Cultural Communities and Creative Industries is hereby constituted within the Bangsamoro Parliament to address this deficiency and play a crucial role in shaping the cultural and artistic landscape of the region.

**Section 2. Subcommittees.** Three (3) subcommittees are hereby created to distinctly concentrate on *Culture and the Arts*, *Cultural Communities*, and *Creative Industries*.

**Section 2. Mandate.** The Committee is entrusted with the formulation of comprehensive policies and initiatives for the preservation, protection, and promotion of the distinctive cultural heritage of the Bangsamoro.

**Section 3. Composition.** The Committee shall be composed of a Chairperson, three Vice-Chairperson(s), and Members, all of whom must be active members of the current Parliament. The Chairperson of the Bureau on Cultural Preservation and Heritage shall serve as a permanent ex-officio member and advisor[1].

**Section 4. Legislative oversight.** The Committee shall engage and convene on legislations which foster artistic development, providing unwavering support for local artists, and creating opportunities for vibrant cultural expression within the Bangsamoro region.

**Section 5. Cultural and Creative Industries.** The Committee shall explore innovative measures to seamlessly integrate cultural identity and creativity into the economic fabric, laying the foundation for the growth of a dynamic and sustainable culture and arts economy.[SM1]

**Section 6. Reporting.** The Committee shall provide regular, transparent reports to the Bangsamoro Parliament, ensuring members are apprised of the progress and initiatives undertaken in the sphere of culture, arts, and cultural community development.

This resolution shall take effect immediately upon approval.

Adopted,

AUTHOR:
**HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN, MD, CHA**
Member of the Parliament

Certified correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested:

**ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
