Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Second Parliament
First Regular Session

**Resolution No. 507**

Authored by: **MP KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., MD, DPBO**

Co-author: **MP MUJIB C. ABU, MP MOHAMMAD KELIE U. ANTAO, MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG, MP SUAIB L. ORANON, MP BASSIR D. UTTO**

**RESOLUTION STRONGLY CONDEMNING THE AMBUSH INCIDENT AGAINST MEDICAL PRACTITIONER DRA. SHARMAINE CEBALLOS BAROQUILLOS AND URGING THE CONCERNED LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES TO THOROUGHLY INVESTIGATE THE INCIDENT, BRING JUSTICE TO THE VICTIM AND ENSURE THE SAFETY OF HEALTH CARE WORKERS.**

**WHEREAS**, Section 4, Article II of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines states in part that “*The prime duty of the Government is to serve and protect the People*”;

**WHEREAS**, Section 1, Article III of the Bill of Rights states that “*No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, nor shall any person be denied the equal protection of laws*”;

**WHEREAS**, it is declared policy of the Bangsamoro Government that it values the dignity of every human person and guarantees full respect for human rights, and it shall give the highest policy to the enactment of measures to protect and enhance the rights of all people to human dignity at all stages of human life;

**WHEREAS**, Section 6 of Article IX of R.A. 11054, also known as Organic law for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, states that “*The Bangsamoro Government shall fully respect human rights*”;

**WHEREAS**, Medical professionals and healthcare workers play a vital role in providing essential healthcare services to the communities and saving lives. Their safety and security are crucial for the uninterrupted delivery of healthcare services;

**WHEREAS**, Dra. Sharmaine Ceballos Baroquillo, a 28-year-old government physician, who works in Sultan Kudarat Provincial Hospital, was seriously injured in an ambush incident in Municipality of Buluan, Maguindanao del Sur, on February 3, 2024;

**WHEREAS**, the initial investigation report revealed that Dra. Baroquillo was driving her vehicle and traversing the National High-way from Datu Paglas Municipality going to Isulan Municipality, Sultan Kudarat, when she noticed a suspicious riding-in tandem was tailing her and upon reaching the dark portion of the national high-way particularly at Barangay Digal, Buluan, Maguindanao Del Sur, the suspects overtook and suddenly shot the victim-doctor several times using an unknown caliber of firearm;

**WHEREAS**, Dra. Baroquillo was able to manage to drive continuously to evade the perpetrators, and reaching the front of Buluan District Hospital, she gradually lost consciousness, and eventually she was immediately brought by concerned citizens to the said hospital;

**WHEREAS**, such acts of violence against Dra. Baroquillo is unacceptable and condemnable, post a threat to the overall well-being of medical society;

**WHEREAS**, given this incident, all members of the community shall denounce any act of violence against medical doctors and healthcare workers and appeal to foster an environment of respect and appreciation for their invaluable contribution to society;

**NOW, THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority; to express its strong condemnation of the ambush incident against medical practitioner, Dra. Sharmaine Ceballos Baroquillos and to urge concerned law enforcement agencies to thoroughly investigate the incident, bring justice to the victim, and ensure the safety of healthcare workers.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, to furnish a copy of this resolution to the Police Regional Office - Bangsamoro Autonomous Region (PRO-BAR), Buluan Municipal Police Station, the Office of Ministry of the Interior and Local Government (MILG), National Bureau of Investigation-Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (NBI-BARMM) for information and appropriate action.

**ADOPTED.**

Author:
**KADIL M. SINOLINDING JR. MD, DPBO**

Certified Correct:
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested By:
**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker
