Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Second Parliament
Second Regular Session

**Proposed Resolution No. 529**

Introduced by: **MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN, MP DAN S. ASNAWIE, AND MP MUSLIMIN A. JAKILAN**

Co-authors: **DEPUTY SPEAKER HATIMIL E. HASSAN, AND MP ALBAKIL D. JIKIRI**

**RESOLUTION CONGRATULATING AND COMMENDING MS. FATIMA AIZA R. MAJAD FOR ACHIEVING THE 6th PLACE in the JANUARY 2024 PHILIPPINE ACADEMY OF MICROBIOLOGY (PAM) CERTIFICATION EXAMINATION FOR REGISTERED MICROBIOLOGIST AND ALL BANGSAMORO PASSERS FOR THEIR OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE**

**WHEREAS**, Section 13, Article II of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and Section 13, Article IX of the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL) both recognized the vital role of the youth in nation-building and shall promote and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social well-being, as well as their role to inculcate in the youth patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in public and civic affairs;

**WHEREAS**, the Philippine Academy of Microbiology (PAM) Certification Examination for Registered Microbiologist was held last January 20 to 21, 2024 a Philippine Academy of Microbiology (PAM) Certification Examination for Registered Microbiologist at the SMX Convention Center Aura, Taguig, Metro Manila;

**WHEREAS**, the recent board examination results for the said examination have been released by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) on February 23, 2024, showcasing outstanding performances by examinees from our community;

**WHEREAS**, among the two hundred three (203) successful examinees, **Ms. Fatima Aiza R. Majad** has demonstrated exceptional dedication, perseverance, and academic excellence ranking 6th with an average of 83.48%, wherein she was the sole Bangsamoro of Basilan origin among the respected top 10 positions in the aforementioned examination;

**WHEREAS**, Ms. Fatima Aiza R. Majad is a born Yakan, who graduated from Mindanao State University-Iligan Institute of Technology (MSU-IIT) last 18th of July 2023 and received the Latin Honor Magna Cum Laude with a Cumulative GPA of 1.20896 and the Silahis Publication Award;

**WHEREAS**, her achievement reflects the high educational standards and intellectual excellence upheld within our community.

**WHEREAS**, her accomplishment serves as a testament to the efficiency of our educational institutions and the dedication of our educators.

**WHEREAS**, by recognizing and honoring the successes of individuals like **Ms. Fatima Aiza R. Majad**, her exemplary performance in ranking 6th for said examination not only brings immense pride, honor, and distinction to our community, but also builds a culture of achievement and inspires others to fulfill their full potential, particularly among the aspiring Bangsamoro students, youth, and young professionals not only in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region but also in the entire country, which merits this Parliament’s recognition and commendation;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to congratulate and commend **Ms. Fatima Aiza R. Majad** for ranking top 6 in the Philippine Academy of Microbiology (PAM) Certification Examination for Registered Microbiologist and including all Bangsamoro passers, thereby giving pride and honor to the Bangsamoro people.

**ADOPTED.**

Author:

(SGD.)
**MP MOSBER E. ALAUDDIN**
Member of the BTA Parliament

(SGD.)
**MP DAN S. ASNAWIE**
Member of the BTA Parliament

(SGD.)
**MP MUSLIMIN A. JAKILAN**
Member of the BTA Parliament

(SGD.)
**MP/PROF. EDDIE M. ALIH**
Member of the BTA Parliament

Co-Authors:

**DEPUTY SPEAKER HATIMIL E. HASSAN**
Member of the BTA Parliament

**MP ALBAKIL D. JIKIRI**
Member of the BTA Parliament

Certified Correct:

(SGD.)
**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested By:

(SGD.)
**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker
