Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**

Second Parliament
First Regular Session
Resolution No. **588**

Introduced by: **MP KADIL M. SINOLINDING, JR., MD, DPBO**

Co-authors : **MP AKMAD I. ABAS, MP HARON M. ABAS, MP BASSIT S. ABBAS, MP DR. HASHEMI N. DILANGALEN, MP ABDULLAH E. GAYAK, MP HATIMIL E. HASSAN, MP JAMEL B. MACACUA, MP ABDULLAH G. MACAPAAR, MP HAMID U. MALIK, MP TAWAKAL B. MIDTIMBANG, MP MICHAEL E. IDTIMBANG, MP NURREDHA I. MISUARI, MP SUWAIB L. ORANON, MP ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, MP SAID Z. SALENDAB, MP ALI O. SALIK, MP SAID M. SHEIK, MP ALI B. SOLAIMAN, MP BASSIR D. UTTO,**

**RESOLUTION**

**CONGRATULATING AND COMMENDING THE BANGSAMORO TOPNOTCHERS IN THE MARCH 2024 LICENSURE EXAMINATION FOR PROFESSIONAL TEACHERS (LEPT), AND ALL BANGSAMORO PASSERS**

**WHEREAS**, on March 24, 2024, the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) and the Board for Professional Teachers released the results of the Licensure Examination for Professional Teachers (LEPT), which was conducted on March 17, 2024, across 36 testing centers nationwide;

**WHEREAS**, a total of 20,890 (46.67%) elementary teachers out of 44,764 examinees and 50,539 (58.78%) secondary teachers out of 85,980 examinees successfully passed the LETP;

**WHEREAS**, among the successful passers, seven (7) Bangsamoro professionals achieved top rankings in LETP, with the following names, ranks, and average scores.

**ELEMENTARY LEVEL**

**NAME**                                               **RANK**                     **SCORE**
1. Fatmah Aliah T. Mandi               Top 8                         91.00%
2. Naharah D. Abdulaziz                Top 9                         90.80%
3. Rahima A. Akmad                        Top 9                         90.80%
4. Hanania P. Dimacaling               Top 10                       90.60%

**SECONDARY LEVEL**
1. Kawther Sacor I. Abdulhalim     Top 9                         91.00%
2. Nidzraleen J. Abdurahim            Top 9                         91.00%
3. Almira O. Mimbala                       Top 10                       90.80%

**WHEREAS**, achieving a rank within the Top 10 in any national licensure examinations, such as the LEPT, is a rare and prestigious achievement, bringing profound pride and honor not only within the family, school, and tribe, but also resonating throughout the entirety of the Bangsamoro community;

**WHEREAS**, the exemplary performance of these topnotchers serves as an inspiration for the Bangsamoro children, youth, and all individuals striving for excellence, not only in the Bangsamoro region but also in the entire country;

**NOW THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to congratulate and commend Ms. Fatmah Aliah Talicop Mandi for achieving the remarkable feat of securing Top 8, Ms. Naharah Dimaocor Abdulaziz and Ms. Rahima Adal Akmad as Top 9 and Ms. Hanania Pundato Dimacaling as Top 10 in the March 2024 Licensure Examination for Professional Teachers (LEPT) for the Elementary Level along with Ms. Kawther Sacor I. Abdulhalim and Ms. Nidzraleen Julkarnain Abdurahim for securing Top 9, and Ms Almira Omar Mimbala as Top 10 for the Secondary Level, and all Bangsamoro passers for bringing pride and honor to the Bangsamoro people.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER**, That the copy of this Resolution be forwarded to the above-mentioned seven (7) topnotchers.

**ADOPTED,**

Author:

(Sgd.)
**KADIL M. SINOLINDING JR., MD, DPBO**
*Member of the Parliament*

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
*Secretary General*

Attested By:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
*Parliament Speaker*
