Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

**THIRD REGULAR SESSION**

**PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 675**

Introduced by:
**Hon. Mohagher M. Iqbal, Hon. Aida M. Silongan, Hon. Sha Elijah B. Dumama-Alba, Hon. Eddie M. Alih, Hon. Mary Ann M. Arnado, Hon. Baileng S. Mantawil**

**A RESOLUTION DIRECTING ALL OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, AND OTHER WORKERS WITHIN THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO AND ITS LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS, TO WEAR TRADITIONAL ATTIRE REPRESENTING THE VARIOUS ETHNICITIES AND TRIBES THAT CONSTITUTE THE BANGSAMORO IDENTITY DURING THE BANGSAMORO FOUNDATION DAY CELEBRATION AND OTHER CULTURALLY-RELATED HOLIDAYS OF THE BARMM**

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region constitutes diverse communities united by a shared history, culture, and identity, which embody the richness of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM);

**WHEREAS**, the Bangsamoro Foundation Day is commemorated every 21st of January which marks the establishment of the BARMM in 2019, symbolizing the continuing journey towards self-determination and peace between the Philippine Government and the Bangsamoro People;

**WHEREAS**, other culturally-related holidays which celebrate, promote, and showcase the heritage, traditions, and values of the Bangsamoro under Section 5 of the Bangsamoro Autonomy Act No. 39, otherwise known as the Bangsamoro Holidays Act of 2023, include:

1. Bangsamoro Day of Solidarity
2. Commemoration of the Signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro
3. Shiek Karimul Makhdum Day
4. Shariff Kabunsuan Day
5. Commemoration of the Signing of the Moro National Liberation Front-Organization of Islamic Conference-Government of the Republic of the Philippines (MNLF-OIC-GRP) 1996 Final Peace Agreement and 1976 Tripoli Agreement
6. Bangsamoro Indigenous Peoples' Thanksgiving Day

**WHEREAS**, traditional attire is a vital expression of the identity and heritage of the various ethnic groups within BARMM, including but not limited to the Maguindanao, Maranao, Tausug, Teduray, Lambangian, Dulangan Manobo, Erumanun Ne Menuvu, Higaonon, B 'laan, Sama Dilaut, Sama Jama Mapun, Sama Bangingi, Sama Pangutaran and such other marginalized and minority indigenous cultural communities;

**WHEREAS**, promoting the wearing of traditional attire during Bangsamoro Foundation Day and other culturally-related holidays foster cultural appreciation, pride, and solidarity while highlighting the contributions of each ethnicity and tribe to the Bangsamoro identity;

**NOW, THEREFORE, be it**

**RESOLVED**, as it hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to encourage all officials, employees, and other workers within the BARMM and its Local Government Units (LGUs) to wear traditional attire representing the various ethnicities and tribes that constitute the Bangsamoro identity during the Bangsamoro Foundation Day celebration and other culturally-related holidays of the BARMM.

**RESOLVED FURTHER**, that appropriate action be undertaken by the Bangsamoro ministries, organizations, and agencies, including LGUs, to raise awareness on the cultural significance of traditional attire, including but not limited to workshops, exhibits, and educational campaigns that highlight the unique designs, meanings, and narratives of each tribe and ethnicity;

**RESOLVED FINALLY**, a copy of this resolution shall be forwarded to all relevant ministries, organizations, and agencies, including LGUs, to ensure its effective implementation and the active participation of the Bangsamoro people.

Adopted, ______________.

**AUTHOR/S:**

(Signed)
**HON. MOHAGHER M. IQBAL**
Member of the Parliament

**HON. BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**
Member of the Parliament

**HON. AIDA M. SILONGAN**
Member of the Parliament

**HON. MARY ANN M. ARNADO**
Member of the Parliament

**HON. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA**
Member of the Parliament

**HON. EDDIE M. ALIH**
Member of the Parliament

Certified Correct:

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested By:

**HON. ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Parliament Speaker

