Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Cotabato City

**Second Parliament**
**Third Regular Session**

**Proposed Resolution No. 677**

Introduced by:

**MP ATTY. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA, MP ATTY. RAISSA H. JAJURIE, MP ATTY. MARY ANN M. ARNADO, and MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**

**RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING ALL PARLIAMENTARY AND STATUTORY COMMITTEES OF THE BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT TO CONDUCT MEETINGS, HEARINGS, AND CONSULTATIONS DURING THE RECESS OF THE SECOND BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY PARLIAMENT**

**WHEREAS**, the Third Regular Session of the Second Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA) Parliament will adjourn *sine die* on 27 February 2025 | 28 Sha’aban 1446 AH per Resolution No. 442 of the BTA Parliament;

**WHEREAS**, there are pending deliberations on priority codes such as the Bangsamoro Revenue Code (BRC), Bangsamoro Gender and Development Code (BGADC), and other important bills and resolutions before the different committees of the BTA Parliament;

**WHEREAS**, the expeditious consideration of these pending measures is in the best interest of the Bangsamoro;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED**, by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament, To authorize all Parliamentary and Statutory Committees of the Parliament to conduct meetings, hearings and consultations during the recess of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority Parliament;

**RESOLVED, FINALLY**, That this Resolution shall take effect on the date of its adoption and shall remain in force until amended or repealed.

Adopted, ____________________.

**Authors:**

(Signed)
**MP ATTY. SHA ELIJAH B. DUMAMA-ALBA**

**MP ATTY. RAISSA H. JAJURIE**

(Signed)
**MP ATTY. MARY ANN M. ARNADO**

(Signed)
**MP ATTY. JOSE I. LORENA**
