Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

First Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**

**BTA RESOLUTION NO. 600**

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduced by:

**MP DR. SUSANA SALVADOR – ANAYATIN**

**Co-Authors:**

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**A RESOLUTION EXTENDING GRATITUDE AND APPRECIATION TO PRESIDENT FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS, JR. FOR APPOINTING AMILBAHAR P. AMILASAN JR. AS ACTING CHAIRMAN/CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AL-AMANAH ISLAMIC INVESTMENT BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES AND FURTHER CONGRATULATING MR. AMILASAN FOR HIS APPOINTMENT**

**WHEREAS**, on June 19, 2024, President Ferdinand R. Marcos, Jr. appointed Mr. Amilbahar P. Amilasan Jr. as Acting Chairman/Chief Executive Officer and Member of the Board of Directors of Al-Amanah Islamic Investment Bank of the Philippines (AAIIBP);

**WHEREAS**, pursuant to Republic Act No. 6848, otherwise known as the Charter of Al-Amanah Islamic Investment Bank, the primary purpose of the Islamic Bank is to promote and accelerate the socio-economic development of the Autonomous Region by performing banking, financing and investment operations and to establish and participate in agricultural, commercial and industrial ventures based on the Islamic concept of banking;

**WHEREAS**, Section 32, Article XIII of Republic Act No. 11054, Republic Act No. 11054, also known as the Bangsamoro Organic Law states that, “The Bangsamoro Government, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Department of Finance, and the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos shall jointly promote the development of an Islamic banking and finance system”;

**WHEREAS**, the AAIIBP operates nine (9) banks, in the cities of Cagayan de Oro, Cotabato, Davao, Iligan, General Santos, Marawi, Makati, Zamboanga, and Jolo, Sulu.

**WHEREAS**, currently, Mr. Amilasan Jr. serves as the Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Finance, Budget, and Management - BARMM (MFBM-BARMM), while also holding the position of Chairman of the Tabun Halal Multi-Purpose Cooperative;

**WHEREAS**, from 2020 to 2022, Deputy Minister Amilasan Jr. served as a consultant for both the Office of the Chief Minister – BARMM and the Bangsamoro Board of Investment - BARMM;

**WHEREAS**, a graduate of Ateneo De Davao University in 1996, Deputy Minister Amilasan, Jr., was hired by the Metropolitan Bank and Trust Company (Metrobank) Cotabato City branch in the same year. During his tenure in Metrobank, he was a Multi-Year Branch Performance Awardee, and served as Senior Manager from 2004 to 2020;

**WHEREAS**, Mr. Amilbahar P. Amilasan Jr.’s extensive years in public service, and commitment to excellence particularly in the field of banking and finance, significantly contributed to his well-deserved appointment to the Al-Amanah Islamic Investment Bank of the Philippines;

**WHEREAS**, this resolution aims to extend gratitude and appreciation to President Ferdinand R. Marcos, Jr., for appointing Deputy Minister Amilasan Jr., and to congratulate the latter on his well-deserved appointment. Deputy Minister Amilasan Jr.'s dedication to his craft, guided by moral governance, will significantly enhance the implementation of a dynamic Islamic banking system in the Philippines, effectively fulfilling the vision and mission of the AAIIBP;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Parliament – Bangsamoro Transition Authority of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to **EXTEND GRATITUDE AND APPRECIATION TO PRESIDENT FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS, JR. FOR APPOINTING AMILBAHAR P. AMILASAN JR. AS ACTING CHAIRMAN/CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AL-AMANAH ISLAMIC INVESTMENT BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES AND FURTHER CONGRATULATING MR. AMILASAN FOR HIS APPOINTMENT.**

**ADOPTED**, June ____, 2024.

Author:

**DR. SUSANA SALVADOR - ANAYATIN**
Member – BTA Parliament

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:

**ATTY. ALI PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
