Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

Third Regular Session

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA RESOLUTION NO. 614**

Introduced by:
**MP DR. SUSANA SALVADOR – ANAYATIN**

Co-Authors:
**MP ATTY. SUHARTO M. AMBOLODTO and MP FROILYN T. MENDOZA**

**A RESOLUTION URGING CONCERNED MINISTRIES, OFFICES, AGENCIES, PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP), AND PHILIPPINE ARMY IN THE BANGSAMORO REGION TO ENSURE THE SAFETY AND SECURITY OF RESIDENTS AND THEIR PROPERTIES IN BARANGAY KUSIONG, DATU ODIN SINSUAT, MAGUINDANAO DEL NORTE, AND SURROUNDING AREAS AMID ONGOING ARMED ATTACKS AND HARASSMENT FROM AN UNIDENTIFIED GROUP, AND TO PROTECT THE RIGHTS OF DISPLACED PERSONS AND PROVIDE ASSISTANCE THEREOF**

**WHEREAS**, Section 4, Article II of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines states that “*The primary duty of the Government is to serve and protect the People xxx;*”

**WHEREAS**, Section 5, Article II of the same law provides that “*The maintenance of peace and order, the protection of life, liberty, and property, and the promotion of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all people of the blessing of democracy;*”

**WHEREAS**, Section 1, Article III of the same law states that “*No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, nor shall any person be denied the equal protection of the laws;*”

**WHEREAS**, on July 24, 2024, an armed conflict took place in the coastal areas of Datu Odin Sinsuat, Maguindanao del Norte, specifically in Brgy. Kusiong, Brgy. Linek, Brgy. Momopong, and Brgy. Badak. This event forced residents to leave their homes and relocate to safer areas.;

**WHEREAS**, this resolution seeks to ensure that the relevant ministries, offices, and agencies enhance security in the area to safeguard the lives and properties of innocent individuals. It also aims to provide suitable relocation options, deliver necessary assistance, and uphold the rights of the displaced persons;

**NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED**, as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Parliament of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to **URGE** the **CONCERNED MINISTRIES, OFFICES, AGENCIES, PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP), AND PHILIPPINE ARMY IN THE BANGSAMORO REGION TO ENSURE THE SAFETY AND SECURITY OF RESIDENTS AND THEIR PROPERTIES IN BARANGAY KUSIONG, DATU ODIN SINSUAT, MAGUINDANAO DEL NORTE, AND SURROUNDING AREAS AMID ONGOING ARMED ATTACKS AND HARASSMENT FROM AN UNIDENTIFIED GROUP, AND TO PROTECT THE RIGHTS OF DISPLACED PERSONS AND PROVIDE ASSISTANCE THEREOF**

Adopted, July ____, 2024.

Author:
**DR. SUSANA SALVADOR – ANAYATIN**
Member – BTA Parliament

**PROF. RABY B. ANGKAL**
Secretary General

Attested by:
**ATTY. PANGALIAN M. BALINDONG**
Speaker
