Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY**
Bangsamoro Government Center, Cotabato City

**SECOND PARLIAMENT**
Third Regular Session

**Resolution No. 628**

Introduced by:
BTA Members AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG, MARJANIE S. MACASALONG, ABDULWAHAB M. PAK, IBRAHIM D. ALI, and BAILENG S. MANTAWIL

**RESOLUTION REQUESTING THE BANGSAMORO ELECTORAL OFFICE TO CONDUCT A THOROUGH REVIEW OF THE BOOK OF VOTERS TO CHECK FOR PATENT IRREGULARITY AND STATISTICAL IMPROBABILITY OF THE DATA CONTAINED THEREIN AND TO SUBMIT A REPORT BEFORE THE BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE SECTION 10, ARTICLE VI OF THE BAA NO. 35 OR THE BANGSAMORO ELECTORAL CODE.**

**WHEREAS,** Section 10, Article VI of the BAA No. 35 or the Bangsamoro Electoral Code (BEC) provides that within one hundred twenty (120) days from the enactment of this Code, the Election Officers of the Bangsamoro Electoral Office (BEO) shall conduct a thorough review of the book of voters to check for patent irregularity and statistical improbability of the data contained therein.

The Commission shall, upon recommendation of the election officer as a result of the review, or upon verified petition of any voter or election officer or duly registered political party, and after notice and hearing, annul any book of voters that is not prepared in accordance with the provisions of this code or was prepared through fraud, bribery, forgery, impersonation, intimidation, force or any similar irregularity, or which contains data that are statistically improbable.

No order, ruling or decision annulling a book of voters shall be executed within ninety (90) days before an election.

**WHEREAS,** the BAA No. 35 or the Bangsamoro Electoral Code was signed into law on March 9, 2023 and that the BEO had had not taken step in the implementation of this provision of the BEC.

**WHEREAS,** the Commission on Election, as a guardian of the sovereign will of the Filipino people, commit themselves to conduct clean, credible, free, honest, orderly and modernized electoral exercises and to empower the electorate toward a vibrant Philippine democracy.

**WHEREAS,** as a government, guardian of the people, it is incumbent upon us to grant the people of the equal opportunity in the electoral exercises by holding a free, orderly, honest, peaceful and credible election through fair election practices.

**WHEREAS,** given the foregoing, it is imperative that the Bangsamoro Electoral Office conduct a comprehensive review of the book of voters and to cleanse the same against multiple registrants, dead registrants, under age registrants and flying voters.

**NOW THEREFORE,** be it

**RESOLVED,** as it is hereby resolved by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, to request the Bangsamoro Electoral Office to conduct a thorough review of the book of voters to check for patent irregularity and statistical improbability of the data contained therein and to submit a report before the Bangsamoro Parliament in compliance of the Section 10, Article VI of the BAA No. 35 or the Bangsamoro Electoral Code.

**RESOLVED, FURTHER,** this resolution be forwarded to the Bangsamoro Electoral Office, for information.

**ADOPTED,** __________

**PRINCIPAL AUTHORS,**

**AMROUSSI A. MACATANONG**
Member of Parliament

**MARJANIE S. MACASALONG**
Member of Parliament

**IBRAHIM D. ALI**
Member of Parliament

**ABDULWAHAB M. PAK**
Member of Parliament

**BAILENG S. MANTAWIL**
Member of Parliament
