Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

**First Regular Session**

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Resolution No. 91**

Introduced by:
**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA**

Co-authored by:
MP Amir S. Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Rasol Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Engr. Don Mustapha A. Loong, MPSA; and MP Rasul E. Ismael; MP Khalid Ma-Amor Hadji Abdullah; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; and MP Bassir D. Utto

**RESOLUTION**

**DIRECTING THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY (MENRE) TO INTENSIFY ITS REFORESTATION PROGRAMS ESPECIALLY IN THE LANDSLIDE PRONE AREAS**

WHEREAS, Section 16, Article II of the 1987 Philippine Constitution states that the State shall protect and advance the right of the people to a balanced and heartfelt ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature;

WHEREAS, **Section 8, Article XIII** of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11054 or the Bangsamoro Organic Law (BOL) states that the protection, conservation, rehabilitation, and development of forests, coastal, and marine resources, including the adoption of programs and projects, to ensure the maintenance of ecological balance and biodiversity shall be given priority;

WHEREAS, **Section 8** of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 10176 or the Arbor Day Act of 2012 states that all able-bodied citizen of the Philippines, who are at least twelve (12) years of age, shall be required to plant one (1) tree every year;

WHEREAS, the Bangsamoro Government released Executive Order No. 007 series of 2020 institutionalizing the Integrated Bangsamoro Greening Program (IBGP) in the entire Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM);

WHEREAS, the Integrated Bangsamoro Greening Program is a banner program of the Bangsamoro Government under the leadership of Chief Minister Ahod Balawag Ibrahim through the Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources and Energy (MENRE). IBGP aims to grow 171.2 million trees covering about 159,000 hectares of forestland within the Area of Responsibility (AOR) of BARMM. It also promotes poverty reduction, resources protection and management, productivity enhancement, food security and nutrition normalization process, and climate change mitigation and adaptation¹;

WHEREAS, around 11.5 million tree seedlings have been planted on 10,401 hectares of land across BARMM according to MENRE²;

WHEREAS, the reforestation activity is one of the environmental interventions to minimize the effects of natural calamities and reduce climate change according to the Director of Forest Management Services Forester Abdul-Jalil Umngan. “The impact of climate change knocks on our doors already and there is no quick solution to lessen the floods aside from reforestation. That is why, we encourage people to support environmental advocacies for the current and future generations,” he added³;

WHEREAS, on October 27, 2022, Severe Tropical Storm Paeng, with international name *Nalgae*, battered some parts of Maguindanao del Norte, Maguindanao del Sur, Cotabato City and other parts of Southwestern Mindanao. Heavy rains brought by the Severe Tropical Storm Paeng caused landslides and severe flooding in the mentioned areas;

WHEREAS, as of 31 October 2022, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) said deaths from Severe Tropical Storm Paeng have reached 110, with 101 injured and 33 missing. 59 of the confirmed fatalities were from BARMM, which suffered massive floods and landslides⁴;

WHEREAS, severe losses from *Paeng* in the autonomous region prompted President Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos, Jr. to call the intensification of tree-planting efforts in BARMM as he expressed alarm over massive deforestation in Maguindanao province. He pointed out the need to plant trees to tackle flooding as he acknowledged threats of climate change. The President noticed that areas badly hit by *Paeng* were the ones that had been deforested⁵;

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED** by the BTA Parliament, to pass and approve this Resolution directing the Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources and Energy to intensify its reforestation programs especially in the landslide prone areas.

Adopted,

(Sgd.)
**ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
Member of Parliament
