Republic of the Philippines
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
**BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY 2**
Cotabato City

**First Regular Session**

**BTA PARLIAMENT**
**BTA Parliament Resolution No. 98**

**Authored by**
**MP Engr. Baintan Adil-Ampatuan, MNSA**

**Co-Authors:**
**MP Amilbahar S. Mawallil, MPSA; MP Atty. Laisa M. Alamia, MNSA; MP Atty. Suharto M. Ambolodto, MNSA; MP Don Mustapha A. Loong, MPSA; MP Atty. Rasol Y. Mitmug, Jr., CESE; MP Rasul E. Ismael; MP Khalid Ma-Amor Hadji Abdullah; MP Jaafar Apollo Mikhail L. Matalam; and MP Bassir D. Utto**

**RESOLUTION**

**REQUESTING THE MINDANAO DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (MINDA) TO APPRISE THE BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY (BTA) PARLIAMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINDANAO RIVER BASIN MASTER PLAN, ESPECIALLY ON THE IDENTIFIED PRIORITY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS**

**WHEREAS,** with a total catchment area of 21,503 square kilometers, the Mindanao River Basin is the current largest river basin in the country encompassing large areas of three regions in Central Mindanao: Regions 10, 12, and BARMM, and that the national government plans for the effective and efficient management and development of the river basin and its resources;

**WHEREAS,** for this purpose, a Master Plan for the river basin has been formulated. The plan preparation has been undertaken through the consultancy services of the Woodfield Consultants, Inc. from 2010 to 2012 with the support of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), National Irrigation Administration (NIA), and Office of Civil Defense (OCD). As stated, the study sought for the long-term rehabilitation and development of the river basin;

**WHEREAS,** in support of the Master Plan, three Regional Development Councils in Mindanao, namely the RDC 10, RDC 12, and REDPB-BARMM of the former ARMM, now BARMM, endorsed the implementation of the Mindanao River Basin (MRB) Master Plan, paving the way for its operationalization and the eventual creation of an institution that will manage, rehabilitate, and develop the river basin and its resources;

**WHEREAS,** it may be recalled that in July 2011, Executive Order No. 50, series of 2011, transferred the tasks and functions of the Presidential Task Force on Mindanao River Basin Rehabilitation and Development to regular government agencies, which include MINDA, DENR River Basin Control Office (RBCO), and the National Risk Reduction Management Council-OCD;

**WHEREAS,** the proposed river basin council will be composed of representatives from the concerned provincial and local government units, national government agencies, river basin and LGU alliances, NGOs and the private sectors. This set-up ensures that all efforts and initiatives to rehabilitate and develop the river basin are well-coordinated with a cohesiveness of objectives;

**WHEREAS,** as stated in the Master Plan, the concerns of the river basin with development programs and projects component include: water resources and watershed management, flood control alongside disaster risk reduction and hazard management, wetland management, economic development, institutional linkages, and an organizational structure for the River Basin Management;

**WHEREAS,** given its adequate executive and legislative powers and authority, the BTA Parliament is in a better position to provide policy measures and legislative support to the successful implementation of the River Basin Master Plan, including the implementation and operationalization of development programs and projects designed for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, hence the importance to brief and update the Parliament about the status of the River Basin Master Plan.

**NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED** by the BTA Parliament, to pass and approve this Resolution requesting the MINDA to apprise the BTA Parliament on the status of the implementation of the Mindanao River Basin Master Plan, especially on the identified priority development programs and projects.

Resolution passed this \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ day of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, 2022, Cotabato City Philippines.

Adopted,

(Sgd.)
**MP ENGR. BAINTAN ADIL-AMPATUAN, MNSA**
